# Clang Static Analysis Working Group - 2026-06-02

## Agenda

- Introductions
- Pain points
- Next steps

## Introductions

- Valentyn from Bloomberg: interested in reducing adoption friction
- Utkarsh from Google: leading Lifetime Safety in Clang
- Aviral: from Apple: general curiosity
- Zeyi Xu: tidy maintainer and lifetime features
- Benedek: student, improving CSA lifetime annotations, here from learning
- Brian Murphy: just listening in, did some static analysis in the past
- Dave from Apple: static analysis tools, focused on SARIF, and tooling around that tracking results over time
- Arseniy from Sonar: using clang as a library; clang diagnostics, AST matchers, and CSA; bringing unified experience for the users
- Victor: tidy maintainer, have experience in integrating static analysis tools
- Jan Voung from Google: clang dataflow contributor (optional, nullability checks)

## Raised pain points
- Balazs:
  - How should we refer to checkers?  => labels
    - Should this affect compiler diags and -W flags?
  - How is `[[clang::suppress]]` supported across tools?
    - I know that `[[clang::suppress(XYZ)]]` does not suppress any issues (at least in CSA)
    - Other bugs/blockers?
  - How much SARIF support do we have across our tools?
  - LLVM-CAS for tidy or CSA; maybe for other tools as well?
  - How to build and analyze all in one go (while compiling)?
  - User-defined annotations for clang-tidy
    - Recent draft PR
    - The core idea is to map custom APIs to “standard” APIs, such that their “optional” and other types would behave for analysis as if they were the standard counterpart.
    - Valentyn will expand on this idea on the next meeting.
  - Sync about the `__counted_by` and in general about the -fbound-safety annotations in different clang tooling.
    - Maybe CSA could use the `__counted_by` attributes for better out of bounds checking.
    - Talk about the AST implications of a recent related PR.
  - Get an update about SSAF (Scalable Static Analysis Framework)
- Valentyn: emphasizes adoption:
  - How to get people to enable more advanced checks? Does anyone have this problem?
  - Dave: we want to bring tooling for SARIF
- Initial adoption burden: initial flood of issues when enabling some check
  - Arseniy: we have features to only show diagnostics that were coming from new code
- Valentyn: Upstream regresses: new FPs/TNs
  - We don’t have any bots checking the findings of CSA
  - We don’t even have scripts to let downstream users run analysis on a default set of projects.
- Arseniy: we analyze a lot of projects and collect the warnings; have specialized SARIF tooling to process and diff these reports.
- Balazs: CSA has some flaky/nondeterministic issues - which is annoying
- Balazs: Does clang-tidy also have similar nondeterminism?
- Victor: not that I’m aware of; the behavior is different of course for different std libs.
- Dave: What are the sources of non-determinism in CSA: hash table ordering, or timeouts?
- Balázs: both:
  - Timeout on our refutation SAT solver, z3
  - Ordering of the bug paths, which matters in the “diamond problem” where path lengths are the same, depending on the pointer integer values one path might be picked over the other in some runs.
    - https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/194822
    - I remember a ticket, but I don’t find it right now.
- Arseniy: it’s hard to predict how long certain analysis targets (function) take for CSA to analyze
  - Balazs: tidy might also have a similar problem with the mutation analyzer, but to a much lesser extent.
- Utkarsh: compile time regressions
  - Is there a way to create a pre/post commit check to ensure we don’t regress on analysis time?
  - May be run it as part of [llvm-compile-time-tracker.com](https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com)
  - Balazs: In CSA, we have some stale Dockerfile and python driver script (SATest.py) that could be used.
  - Victor: In tidy we have a [repo](https://github.com/clang-tidy-infra/CTIT) that we use in a nightly job to track crashes and soon analysis time regression.
- Balazs: ParentMapContext, and traversal from TUDecl triggers the load of the whole module/PCH file
  - Utkarsh: Lifetime Safety encountered this in https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/200170
  - Loosely relates to this [PR](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/145630) as well.
  - Balazs: We could maybe set some traversal scope for tidy, and for ParentMap
  - Balázs: The naïve way of implementing an ASTConsumer is the “wrong” way: implementing the `HandleTranslationUnit` callback and feeding the `TUDecl` to a `RecursiveASTVisitor` - which then deserializes everything…

## What’s next?

- Arseniy: Let’s have a dedicated page for the potential subjects.
  - We would vote on the subjects and prioritize them that way.
  - We could start with the announced subjects,
  - Then the subject we raised during this meeting
  - We could extend the list later.

## Action items:

- Valentyn: Prepares a discussion about the customizable tidy PR for the next meeting.
- Balázs Benics: Ask for the Discord channel: #clang-static-analysis-wg
- Balázs Benics: Create a list of subjects to vote on, and cover in the future.
- Balázs Benics: Ask if we should reschedule this to every 4th week.
- Balázs Benics: Set up a pipeline for work items for the upcoming meetings, to saturate at least 2 months => brings regular cadence, sets expectation of the upcoming subjects.
