# Clang Static Analysis Working Group - 2026-06-16

## Agenda

- Valentyn: Drives a discussion about the customizable tidy [PR](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/195054).
- Agree on relaxing the schedule to every 4th week.
  - David: I prefer an even number of weeks of recurrence.
  - Victor: if we relax the occurrence, we should extend the meeting to cover more ground.
  - TODO: Raise this at the Discourse thread.
- Schedule some topics for the upcoming meetings.

## Discussion about Valentyn's [presentation](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1r4KS9M5wyfKMG2SdY0mQ5LLlkMdzYe074Idmc8O6yM0)

- clang-tidy doesn’t work with custom `std::optional`-like types.
- Currently there are 2 common ways of “adding” this customization point:
  - Checkers provide configurable “hooks” to customize the triggers.
  - Or patches the checkers directly because they are hard-coded.
    - This scales very poorly to many libraries, and doesn’t scale at all to downstream APIs.
- Proposed solution: `[[clang::analyze_as(...)]]` - read the draft [PR](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/195054)
- Previous feedback was:
  - Return types must match in the annotated method and the one in the std counterpart.
    - David: Users probably want this. Almost every projects have their own similar-ish libraries.
  - Consider the model-focused annotations: capable of describing other contracts like `std::expected`, etc.
    - Dave: generic type-state system. This is much more bugprone.
- Dave: Ctors, are they challenging because they are more likely to be overloaded? - yes
  - So this ties to overloaded functions in general.
- Arseniy: Why attributes, why not some side config file?
  - Library maintainers might not be interested in adding new attributes if this attribute is only supported in clang. They might push back because new attributes degrade readability.
- Dave: annotations can describe properties that apply to more than a single checker.
  - Separate config files need to be distributed and consumed when analyzing.
  - Annotations live inline to your source code.
- Arseniy: the config could be distributed the same way as the headers.
- Victor: we currently don’t have a way to feed CSA configs via clang-tidy right now.
- Arseniy: A pragma comment could link the config file to the header.
- Balazs’ monolog about preferring analyze_as over a more refined model.
- Dave: The two approaches are orthogonal.

## Summary
- Refine the original proposal
- More research about overloaded methods, and APINotes and other ways of configuring the APIs.
