## Jan 21, 2026 | [Clang area team meeting](https://www.google.com/calendar/event?eid=Y3NoM2c4bmRyaG5wOXI2NmtwOHNpdGs1N2pfMjAyNjAxMjFUMTkwMDAwWiBybmtAbGx2bS5vcmc)

Attendees: [efriedma@quicinc.com](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) [aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@llvm.org) [rkleckner@nvidia.com](mailto:rkleckner@nvidia.com)

Notes

* Maintainers refresh for Clang in progress
  * (Also, maintainers is a project council topic of discussion)
  * Some emails are stale (worth scrubbing)
  * Some folks dropping or swapping responsibilities
  * Also covering clang-tools-extra
    * Clang-doc and clangd need maintainers
  * Alternatively, we can do the communication through github issues
  * Aaron also found maintainers for uncovered top-level projects (openmp, sycl, libcxxabi, libclc, other minor subprojects)
  * Need maintainers for llvm-project/third\_party/\*
* [\[RFC\] HMake for LLVM](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-hmake-for-llvm/88997/6)
  * This is overdue for a response. The PR is large, makes direct use of system APIs, and there is no high level explanation of the design, just links to find more context in ISOCPP SG15. Maybe there’s a good design there, but it requires elaboration.
  * Some prior art via clangd
  * General discomfort adding more IPC, particularly for the compiler. This makes maintenance harder because of how different IPC is between systems. Also, C++20 modules (in terms of how they interact with build systems) is still rather experimental, so we should be careful to coordinate with other implementations
  * Reid talked at length about how this might connect to the interest in buildozer-like solutions
  * Needs a design, and the design should address how the new IPC system is deterministic (not dependent on IPC timing/ordering), retains the functional properties of batch compilation, where an IPC compilation can be decomposed into separate process invocation actions to enable distributed builds, temporary saving, and capturing intermediate file temporary state.
* [\[RFC\] Yet Another LLVM restrict Support](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-yet-another-llvm-restrict-support/87612/25)
  * Needs more engagement to get this over the finish line, this proceeds at a drip pace
  * Actually implementing restrict has the potential to break users relying on existing behavior
  * How do we incentivize collaboration on this? We have competing proposals (byte type) and others
  * Push to do this as part of the alias analysis sync call?
  * Or, does this connect to the LLVM IR formal semantics working group?
  * Long discussion about the tradeoffs between implementing restrict.
    * A significant contingent of users (HPC, GPUs, offloading, vector programming) really want this
    * A Linux distro maintainer probably doesn’t want to “fix the world” of working C code that has legacy \`restrict\` annotations in headers
  * Maybe the solution here is that we have an off-by-default mode under a flag (think \-fstrict-aliasing)
  * Users struggle to use \`restrict\` correctly. Maybe the ergonomics are wrong. Should we surface an alternative representation? A new builtin that maps directly onto the low-level LLVM rep (new provenance)?
  * Action: Contact relevant WGs (formal semantics & AA) and proceed from there
* [Modules bi-weekly sync update](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/modules-bi-weekly-meetup-notes-jan-20-2026/89523)
  * Wants input on: [https://gist.github.com/naveen-seth/a42fd4378fde335fc62055722d3a3880](https://gist.github.com/naveen-seth/a42fd4378fde335fc62055722d3a3880)
  * No action from us, our recommendation is that Naveen sync with ChuangQi and Michael Spencer
* LLVM ABI library has an open PR that needs review: [https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/174634/changes](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/174634/changes)
* Out of scope:
  * [\[RFC\] Proposed update to handling debug locations in LLVM](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-proposed-update-to-handling-debug-locations-in-llvm/79244/13)
    * LLVM-y, next steps clear
  * [\[RFC\] Function-Level flatten\_depth Attribute for Depth-Limited Inlining](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-function-level-flatten-depth-attribute-for-depth-limited-inlining/89017/20)
    * Current proposal is LLVM-only (move existing flatten attribute down to LLVM IR level)
  * [\[RFC\] New warning for empty initialization in for-loops (potential state carry-over)](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-new-warning-for-empty-initialization-in-for-loops-potential-state-carry-over/89532/7)
    * Already has feedback
  * [\[RFC\] \[DebugInfo\] Selectively generate template parameters in the skeleton CU](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-debuginfo-selectively-generate-template-parameters-in-the-skeleton-cu/89395/7)
    * Uncontroversial, accepted
  * [\[RFC\] Improving LLVM Support for Alternative Constraints in GNU Extended Inline Assembly](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-improving-llvm-support-for-alternative-constraints-in-gnu-extended-inline-assembly/89350/25)
    * Clang aspect is surface-level, probably doesn’t require our input, mostly backend
  * [\[RFC\] Lightweight Fault Isolation (LFI): Efficient Native Code Sandboxing (Upstream LFI Target and Compiler Changes)](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-lightweight-fault-isolation-lfi-efficient-native-code-sandboxing-upstream-lfi-target-and-compiler-changes/88380/34)
    *

Action items

- [ ] [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@llvm.org) will respond to HMake RFC asking for more
- [x] ~~[aaron@aaronballman.com](mailto:aaron@aaronballman.com) will follow up on \`restrict\`~~

## Jan 8, 2026 | [Clang area team meeting](https://www.google.com/calendar/event?eid=MGhocnA3bWFqN2Y5MDVhb2hzYjEzYmw2bHZfMjAyNjAxMDhUMTgwMDAwWiBybmtAbGx2bS5vcmc)

Attendees: [efriedma@quicinc.com](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) [rnk@google.com](mailto:rnk@google.com) [aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@llvm.org) [rkleckner@nvidia.com](mailto:rkleckner@nvidia.com)

Notes

* Aaron is reviewing and updating maintainer list
  * Discussed siloing within the project, for better or worse
  * Aaron: How do we identify areas that lack maintainers? A signal could be PRs without response.
  * Reid: Unrelated, but I need to put Eric Astor into the LLVM MASM maintainer file
  * Consider the career benefits of adding people to the maintainer file
* Continuity for the next clang area team:
  * We could write more things down about our process, but we can make up for a lack of docs by joining subsequent meetings and maintaining continuity.
* [\[RFC\] \[Clang\] Not assuming there is at most one definition in a redeclaration chain](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-clang-not-assuming-there-is-at-most-one-definition-in-a-redeclaration-chain/89360/7)
  * Basically, we have to accept this, because the languages (C/C++) have changed (compatible C struct redefinitions, C++ modules)
  * AST invariant change, deserves a release note. AST consumers *will* break.
  * Reid: Richard [suggested](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/172430#issuecomment-3662003519) changing Clang to model multiple modules as multiple TranslationUnitDecls. What do we think?
    * “(If we choose to directly represent the post-modules state in the AST \-- for example, including the possibility of there being multiple definitions of entities in different TUs in the same AST \-- I'd encourage that you also model the multiple TUs themselves explicitly, by creating multiple distinct TranslationUnitDecls, one per module.)”
    * Reid: What’s the benefit of moving to multiple TU decls? This would break other invariants that there is one global TU, but what would it preserve? Would this really allow us to preserve the invariant that there is one definition per redeclaration chain? This seems like a lot of work, and perhaps there are other easier ways to improve AST fidelity that are higher priority.
    * ChuanQi and Michael Spencer are the major modules stakeholders, so we should look for a time that works for them.
* PCH RFC
  * We agree this is an indictment of Clang modules, WG21 C++20 modules, and the ecosystem as a whole 🙁
  * Reid attempted a clang header module build (LLVM\_ENABLE\_MODULES=ON), but this yielded bad results. The build repeatedly bottlenecks rebuilding base PCM files, i.e. you need to rebuild LLVMIR, Support, etc with new flags, repeatedly, throughout the build.
  * Reid: Perhaps I/we can look at PCH as a step on the path to improvement. The PCH build becomes the target to beat. If we can come within some small % of the PCH build with modules, we should switch to modules, because it’s on the standards track, and all the various transparency benefits.
  * Hypothetical tradeoff: Assume the worst, and nobody works on modularization, so we live with the PCH build for 5 years. We’d rather have fast builds for 5 years and modules some time later, but we should take the PCH build now.
  * Aaron: PCH is portable across all compilers and toolchains, whereas clang header modules are a Clang-only solution. If the goal is to make the project more accessible, PCH does more to meet new developers where they are, with MSVC & GCC.
  * Discussed IWYU as a solution to PCH. Reid’s experience with IWYU is that it’s a whole other tool you have to commit to and approve.
    * Include management is a big pain point in C++\! This is a big part of why users want modules, so they can say “import std” and not think so hard about which header stuff comes from. There’s a gap here for an IWYU successor project, something that really solves header management, include fixing etc.
* Recognition is an extremely valuable currency, and we should lean into that\!
  * We have several examples of adding junior engineers to maintainer
  * Kudos thread / channel: Say thank you to a community member for… whatever they did
  * Review is often “critical”
  * Venue for users to say thanks?
  * Recognition for maintainers: Grimoire, analytics, revisit Shafik & Vlad’s metrics
* [\[RFC\] Deprecate and remove LLVM\_BUILD\_EXTERNAL COMPILER\_RT](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-deprecate-and-remove-llvm-build-external-compiler-rt/62058/17)
* [\[RFC\] Add “cuda” clang-tidy module](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-add-cuda-clang-tidy-module/81379/13)
* [RFC: Integrate Clang-Tidy checkers into Clang Static Analyzer](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-integrate-clang-tidy-checkers-into-clang-static-analyzer/88937/24)
  * Possibly the main consideration here is binary size?
  * Back in the day, there was a big push back against incorporating Tooling/\* headers into the main clang binary, we wanted to keep the AST Matcher libraries \*out\* of the main compiler. It’s not clear what the concerns were at a deep level, was it compile time, build size, clang build time?
  * The important thing is compile time, users care about that\! Given that this doesn’t affect that, perhaps it's OK.
* [RFC: Flow-Sensitive Nullability](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-flow-sensitive-nullability/89042/10)
* [\[RFC\] Add TBAA metadata to returned aggregates](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-add-tbaa-metadata-to-returned-aggregates/88988/4)
* Accepted / No action required:
  * [\[RFC\] File system sandboxing in Clang/LLVM](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-file-system-sandboxing-in-clang-llvm/88791/23)
    * Accepted
  * [Experience with \[\[clang::musttail\]\]](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/experience-with-clang-musttail/89085/9)
    * Mostly WG14/21 input
  * [\[RFC\] abseil-unchecked-statusor-use check](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-abseil-unchecked-statusor-use-check/87998/7)
    * Landed
  * [\[RFC\] Yet Another LLVM restrict Support](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-yet-another-llvm-restrict-support/87612/20)
    * Eli already responded
  * [\[RFC\] Call for contributors for C++20 Modules on Windows](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-call-for-contributors-for-c-20-modules-on-windows/89342)
    * Nothing to accept/reject

Action items

- [ ] [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@llvm.org): Will comment on pre-compiled header RFC, ship PCH for now, assuming folks agree (we’re not the relevant area team), will speak as an individual

## Dec 11, 2025 | [Clang area team meeting](https://www.google.com/calendar/event?eid=MGhocnA3bWFqN2Y5MDVhb2hzYjEzYmw2bHZfMjAyNTExMTNUMTgwMDAwWiBybmtAbGx2bS5vcmc)

Attendees: [efriedma@quicinc.com](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) [aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com)

Notes

* File system sandboxing
  * [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-file-system-sandboxing-in-clang-llvm/88791/](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-file-system-sandboxing-in-clang-llvm/88791/)
  * No objections, but not a lot of support either.
  * Aaron: inclined to accept despite the lack of supporting comments; seems like the kind of RFC folks don’t have opinions on so long as it doesn’t negatively impact them, and this improves security posture.
  * Aaron: my recommendation is to move forward with the RFC, but curious about other thoughts
  * Eli: I don’t see a problem with it; no impact for release builds, really. Seems fine
  * **Action item: Aaron to post acceptance message**
* Extend ExtVectorElementExpr for HLSL Matrix Accessors
  * [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-extend-extvectorelementexpr-for-hlsl-matrix-accessors/88802](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-extend-extvectorelementexpr-for-hlsl-matrix-accessors/88802)
  * Stuck without much discussion, is this a lack of interest or just too niche?
  * How do we get next steps?
  * Aaron: unsure of how to proceed on this one
  * Eli: it looks fine; the alternative is adding a new AST node to do the same thing, so might as well do this. If we run into problems, we can change it later.
  * Aaron: because it’s HLSL, that’s already a thing, might as well accept
  * **Action item: Aaron to post acceptance message**
* Add TBAA metadata to returned aggregates
  * [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-add-tbaa-metadata-to-returned-aggregates/88988](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-add-tbaa-metadata-to-returned-aggregates/88988)
  * Has no discussion after two weeks
  * How do we get next steps?
  * Aaron: scared because TBAA, seems like something the community would normally comment on
  * Eli: doesn’t seem to propose anything new, it’s adding metadata where it should have been in the first place. Maybe some implementation details need to be looked at carefully. Return types can be coerced into types that don’t match the type of the struct. Doesn’t seem to need an RFC?
  * Aaron: my concern is that this will start taking advantage of UB where it didn’t previously. Are there security concerns?
  * Eli: I think you would have hit those problems some other way. But yes, adding TBAA could potentially cause issues. We could add a temporary flag for controlling it to help with upgrade paths. But this doesn’t depart from our general rules around TBAA
  * Aaron: should we ask for performance numbers to justify the risk?
  * Eli: yeah, I do question whether it’s likely to be beneficial for optimizations. Because of the way the codegen rules work, this may only apply when initializing a variable, which does make it a little bit hard to imagine getting significant performance gains.
  * **Action item: Eli will think about this more and post some comments on the RFC**
  * Aaron: [https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/171173/](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/171173/) is an existing PR on this
  * Eli: not the same author as the RFC
* A consistent set of semantics for the floating-point minimum and maximum operations
  * [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-a-consistent-set-of-semantics-for-the-floating-point-minimum-and-maximum-operations/89006](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-a-consistent-set-of-semantics-for-the-floating-point-minimum-and-maximum-operations/89006)
  * Eli: seems to be an RFC to preserve the semantics of the C function. Maybe it’s not under our area team, but some area team should be involved because the discussion isn’t moving forward. Does the LLVM area team host discussions?
  * Aaron: it’s about the LLVM intrinsics, so probably makes more sense for their area team to host a meeting
  * Eli: discussion is going in circles, so we need a summary of the actual key points and then make a decision.
  * **Action item: Aaron to reach out to Nikita to see if LLVM Area Team can schedule a meeting for it.**

## Nov 18, 2025 | [Clang area team meeting](https://www.google.com/calendar/event?eid=MGhocnA3bWFqN2Y5MDVhb2hzYjEzYmw2bHZfMjAyNTExMTNUMTgwMDAwWiBybmtAbGx2bS5vcmc)

Attendees: [efriedma@quicinc.com](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com) [aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@llvm.org)

Notes

* Overflow behavior types:
  * [https://clang.llvm.org/get\_involved.html\#criteria](https://clang.llvm.org/get_involved.html#criteria) question, essentially
  * Earlier we focused a lot on the maintenance cost to Clang, how the type specifiers interact, not the user experience, ergonomics, security benefit, etc.
  * Chicken and egg problem: Where does the feature start life, upstream implementation, downstream fork & usage, or in standards body?
  * What is the next step, reopen the RFC? We all still agree we need a type annotation  for modular, wrapping arithmetic, i.e. intentional “overflow”.
    * Perhaps the next step is setting up a call where folks get together to identify next steps (recursive\!)
  * Options:
    * Do nothing
    * Reopen RFC
    * Arrange call
  * **Decision:** Scheduling a call seems like the way to go.
    * Logistically, this is either the week of Thanksgiving, or in the new year, new area team, new ATLs
  * Reid: Idea for breaking the chicken and egg loop: Should we reconsider long-lived feature branches?
    * This is a different flavor of incubator projects. This gets us off the hook from maintaining the feature on \`main\` if it fails to get adoption, but allows us to signal that we want the proposal. It’s “[llvm.org](http://llvm.org) branded” so to speak.
* Auditable SARIF logs (Dave Bartolomeo)
  * Reid: Total digression about a previous attempt to contribute CodeView type information where we ended up reimplementing a bunch of stuff. Want to help this go in\!
  * Seems uncontroversial, we should approve it.
  * Aaron will wait to respond tomorrow, we can read through the proposal overnight.
  * Stable warning identifiers: How stable do they need to be?
    * Current implementation just uses the tablegen string names
  * Warning groups vs. diagnostics:
    * Each text fragment diagnostic has a unique, stable id
    * Diagnostics can move between warning groups, warning group names may change
    * Dave would prefer *not* to distinguish between individual diagnostics
    * Reid: The diagnostic enum names closely correspond to the diagnostic text
    * They start with err\_/warn\_/ext\_, and we often move diagnostics between them, very unstable
  * Open questions remain, but the RFC is accepted. Nobody objects, we want this functionality.
* Elections
  * Plan to maintain continuity
  * Reid: I may try to rope Erich into this, and look at a different area team, to get new folks to engage with the process, and maintain organizational diversity.
  * We also have the option to vote to expand the area team size. We can do this at any time. Could go up to 5\.
  * Rationale: We want to bring in new people with experience, new expertise, provide continuity, and draw more people into the governance process.
  * **Motion:** Starting in March 2026, we will expand the size of the Clang area team to 5\.
    * **Approved unanimously**
  * Key dates in LP-0004: Candidate nominations happen 2nd Monday of January, (2 weeks), then 4th Monday elections open, elections open two weeks, then new teams formed.

Action items

- [x] ~~[aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com): Will respond to SARIF RFC~~
- [x] ~~[aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com): Will reach out to John, Kees, Justin, Oliver, try to target Thanksgiving week, focus on technical design~~

## Oct 16, 2025 | [Clang area team meeting](https://www.google.com/calendar/event?eid=MGhocnA3bWFqN2Y5MDVhb2hzYjEzYmw2bHZfMjAyNTEwMTZUMTcwMDAwWiBybmtAbGx2bS5vcmc)

Attendees: [efriedma@quicinc.com](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com) [aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@llvm.org)

Notes

* Welcome back Aaron\!
* Run through previous action items
  * [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@llvm.org): Pretty sure I didn’t get to any 😅
* AI policy: Let’s table this, we discussed it in the lang WG, and much could be said on this topic, and changes are planned.
* Discussed project development metrics, Grimoirelab, Aaron & Vlad gathered PR data
* [\[RFC\] An opt-in CMake option for 64-bit Source Location](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-an-opt-in-cmake-option-for-64-bit-source-location/87538)
  * Status is: we weren’t willing to eat the permanent memory usage increase.
  * Vassily is proposing an open project to reuse slocs for textual headers included in multiple modules, since this is what drives sloc usage.
  * Alternatively, if another major stakeholder came forward and said they want this change or have this use case, we’d reconsider and reopen this.
* [\[RFC\] \_\_builtin\_static\_analysis\_assume](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-builtin-static-analysis-assume/88544)
  * New since last time
  * No-UB variant of \`\_\_builtin\_assume\`, similar to the difference between \`\_\_attribute\_\_((nonnull))\` and \`\_Nonnull\` (I think)
  * Ongoing
  * We like the idea of \`\[\[analyzer\_assume(cond)\]\]\` similar to \`analyzer\_noreturn\`, basically, assume, but only for analyzers.
* [\[RFC\] A Framework for Allocator Partitioning Hints](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-a-framework-for-allocator-partitioning-hints/87434)
  * This has moved to implementation, it doesn’t seem like there are objections, we should formally accept it and close it.
  * Eli: Should we have a policy requiring people to get more formal approval from area teams? Should we more formally track acceptance?
    * Reid: Yes, and we should figure out how.
  * Do we have the capacity to formally accept all RFCs with clear consensus?
  * Can we carve out an exception for moving to implementation in the case of uncontroversial proposals with no objections?
  * We could empower individual ATLs to approve uncontroversial RFCs.
  * Could have a shared dashboard to track which ones have been reviewed. PRs? 😀
  * Could have a formal RFC Discourse tag
  * Having a github repo to track RFCs would allow the ACL tracking to be always-up-to-date
    * … but this would probably require some automation. Nightly?
    * Allows us to build a dashboard for unreviewed RFCs, have formal tracking, access control
  * Conclusion: This is all input to future area teams, something we hand over as a lesson, part of continuity.
*

Action items

- [x] ~~[Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@llvm.org): Will update 64-bit slocs RFC with the two outcomes, open project, vs new stakeholder~~
- [x] ~~[aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) will respond to static-analysis assume~~
- [x] ~~[aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) will formally accept the allocator partitioning RFC~~
- [ ]

## Oct 2, 2025 | [Clang area team meeting](https://www.google.com/calendar/event?eid=MGhocnA3bWFqN2Y5MDVhb2hzYjEzYmw2bHZfMjAyNTEwMDJUMTcwMDAwWiBybmtAZ29vZ2xlLmNvbQ)

Attendees: [Eli Friedman](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com) [Aaron Ballman](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) [rnk@llvm.org](mailto:rnk@llvm.org)

Agenda

* Overflow Behavior Type specifiers, what do we think? [https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/148914](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/148914)
  * Significant objections from Oliver
  * One concern: Do we have to worry about backwards compatibility? Are we comfortable condoning features that create a dialect that behaves differently when the specifiers are disabled (old GCC)?
  * There’s active discussion, we don’t plan to take action.
  * How do we feel about private communication? This was part of the lead up to the miscommunications around \`\_\_counted\_by\`.
* [AI Policy RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-llvm-ai-tool-policy-start-small-no-slop/88476)
* \`-f\[no-\]strict-bool\`  [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/defining-what-happens-when-a-bool-isn-t-0-or-1/86778/36](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/defining-what-happens-when-a-bool-isn-t-0-or-1/86778/36)
  * We don’t see any objections.
  * Essentially, this is an off-by-default driver flag, that’s the cost, and we can use this to gather size/performance metrics to support the value of the range metadata optimizations.
  * Main cost to the project is configuration complexity, expanding matrix of supported configs, but it seems worth it.
* [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-new-wasm-linux-target-support/88203/8](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-new-wasm-linux-target-support/88203/8)
* Reid: LFX has [onboarded LLVM into insights](https://insights.linuxfoundation.org/project/llvm-llvm-project/repository/llvm-llvm-project?timeRange=past365days&start=2024-10-02&end=2025-10-02)
  * Reid: Will share this to Discourse later with more thoughts. The novelty is mostly the PR analytics and the organizational affiliation
* Prep for dev meeting: There’s going to be a session on area team lessons and experience
  * Reid has some slides he can roll over
  * Main lessons are from OBT RFC and \_\_counted\_by RFC
  * How does the clang area team relate to ISO\*? Standardization before implementation, or other way?
* LFI: Basically nacl 2.0, but not web-tech. Cheap sandboxing on client OSs like Android.
* [Abbrev removal RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-c-modules-stop-using-abbrev-and-drop-the-maintainance/87063/25)
  * Needs discussion, suggest we join the next Modules working group instance,
* [Constant time coding RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-constant-time-coding-support/87781/36)
  * Stalled
  * Objection is that having an opaque operation set will block optimizations, but the memory and cache hierarchy is the biggest side channel, and that seems out of scope.
  * This is really LLVM-y, the cost of Clang types is lower than LLVM types

Action items

- [x] ~~[Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@llvm.org): Will follow up on the OBT PR and share the lessons that private communication is great, but it’s helpful to get public status updates with ETAs so folks know that things are in motion. Value of open communication.~~
- [x] ~~[efriedma@quicinc.com](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) will follow up on musl wali, saying we discussed it and we like the environment tweak over the use of the vendor field~~
- [x] ~~[Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@llvm.org) will follow up on preparing for the developer meeting~~
- [x] ~~[Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@llvm.org) will follow up on Abbreviations removal RFC~~

## Sep 18, 2025 | [Clang area team meeting](https://www.google.com/calendar/event?eid=MGhocnA3bWFqN2Y5MDVhb2hzYjEzYmw2bHZfMjAyNTA5MThUMTcwMDAwWiBybmtAZ29vZ2xlLmNvbQ)

Attendees: [Eli Friedman](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com) [Aaron Ballman](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) [rnk@llvm.org](mailto:rnk@llvm.org)

Notes

* [RFC search](https://discourse.llvm.org/search?q=RFC%20tags%3Aclang%20order%3Alatest)
  *
  * [\[RFC\] Call Graph Information from Clang/LLVM for C/C++](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-call-graph-information-from-clang-llvm-for-c-c/88255)
  * [Main branch protections RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-require-pull-requests-for-all-llvm-project-commits/88164/16)
    * Input already given, things are moving along
  * [Hardening mode](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-hardening-mode-for-the-compiler/87660/30)
  * [Bounds safety checking compat with GCC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-bounds-safety-in-c-syntax-compatibility-with-gcc/85885/53)
  * [Lifetime move pass](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-add-lifetimemovepass/87005/2)
  * [Coroutine debug info suspend points](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-debug-info-for-coroutine-suspension-locations-take-2/86606/18)
  * [YAML schema?](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-yamlgenerateschema-support-for-producing-yaml-schemas/85846/8)
    * Would like to see Clang use more YAML, clang tools use YAML, but this seems proceeding, doesn’t need input.
  * [CodeGenTypes.h public API:](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-promote-clang-lib-codegen-codegentypes-h-to-public-api/88239/4)
    * Seems uncontroversial, so long as we’re not promising a stable API
    * These interfaces may change substantially over the near future in light of removal of aggregate types from LLVM IR
    * In general, we want to support companies upstreaming their work and encourage them to do more of it, and this supports that.
  * [ABI lowering library for LLVM](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-an-abi-lowering-library-for-llvm/84495/34)
    * SG, have to follow up on this
  * [Ripple](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-ripple-a-compiler-interpreted-api-to-support-spmd-and-loop-annotation-programming-for-simd-targets/88241)
    * Qualcomm thing, and we’re always mindful of ATL conflicts of interests
    * Seems reaosnable, but let’s focus on the impact to clang
    * Low frontend syntactic impact: Expressed using existing constructs, mostly involves many pragmas
    * Primary path is from C to LLVM IR. The MLIR dialect exists for other frontends.
    * Reid: I’ve always wondered if there is overlap here with the CIR MLIR lowering project. Does that project offer a pathway for hardware vendors to create custom dialects and emit those directly from the frontend (Clang)?
    * Does Clang IR help avoid the problem of irreducible control flow graphs? Avoid unlowerable, unstructured control flow? Eli: Algorithms exist, this is a solved problem, it can always be fixed through cloning.
    * People do run into trouble when the hardware of frontend dialect cares about loop structure, this gets lost in LLVM IR
    * Reid: I think the next step for Qualcomm here is to identify a second stakeholder, a customer, a user, another vendor, someone like that.

Action items

- [ ] [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com) will mention we discussed this and don’t think it’s controversial / accepted.

---

## Sep 4, 2025 | [Clang area team meeting](https://www.google.com/calendar/event?eid=MGhocnA3bWFqN2Y5MDVhb2hzYjEzYmw2bHZfMjAyNTA5MDRUMTcwMDAwWiBybmtAZ29vZ2xlLmNvbQ)

Attendees: [Eli Friedman](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com)

Notes

* [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com): Playing with the Discourse JSON API to pull RFCs:
  *
* [New subcategory](https://discourse.llvm.org/c/clang/isocpp/113) under Clang Frontend: ISO WG14/WG21
  * See [meeting notes from Clang lang WG](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1x5-RbOC6-jnI_NcJ9Dp4pSmGhhNe7lUevuWUIB46TeM/edit?tab=t.0)
  * Idea is we should turn positions that the community currently circulates in Google docs into something linkable and finalized that can be the official Clang project implementor position
  * Reid: For my purposes I wanted to give input on `return goto` which has to do with musttail
  * ISO mailing lists are members-only. Part of the purpose of this forum is to have a venue that is open to *all* LLVM community members.
  * Don’t try to have a position on everything, just give input on things that have relevant implementation concerns.
  * Don’t want to create a space to argue over syntax, really want to focus on *implementation concerns*.
  * Reid: It’s already the case that we don’t fully implement the C++ standard checklist of features (see [cxx\_status.html](https://clang.llvm.org/cxx_status.html#cxx20)), and I think it would be healthy for us to be on the record about that before the features get voted into ISO, so users’ expectations are set correctly
    * Eli: Could have a document covering each standard version
* [PR RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-require-pull-requests-for-all-llvm-project-commits/88164/16)
  * Requiring a PR is effectively an adaptation for GitHub UI limitations, can’t have discussions *on* direct push commits
  * Eli: Share concerns with others that gating on green premerge checks could be a big mess
  * Eli: If we have a new script to upload a PR and land it, that would mitigate
  * Technical concerns: How does this interact with stacked PRs? Do the stacked PR tools use direct pushes? (spr)
  * Eli: Need to preserve the ability to bypass checks and just fix stuff, always need the opt-out, the break-glass. Don’t want to have fine-grained access controls where a small group of individuals have special privileges.
  * Reid: I basically want everyone to have all permissions, to be able to push whatever, but i want to have auditability, for software supply chain concerns. ([EU CRA](https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/cyber-resilience-act), etc)
  * Eli: How much of a difference does 2P review make for supply chain concerns?
  * Eli: Auditing is far down the priority list, ROI of hardening or sandboxing is higher than reviewing upstream LLVM changes
  * Reid: auditing is less of a firehose than it sounds, 80% of LLVM changes have an associated PR (was it reviewed? Don’t know)
* Aside: The ElaboratedType AST node removal created significant instability

Action items

- [ ] [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com) Write up these ideas about the ISO\* subcategory and post it as an RFC to Clang Frontend

## Aug 21, 2025 | [Clang area team meeting](https://www.google.com/calendar/event?eid=MGhocnA3bWFqN2Y5MDVhb2hzYjEzYmw2bHZfMjAyNTA2MjZUMTcwMDAwWiBybmtAbGx2bS5vcmc)

Attendees: [efriedma@quicinc.com](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) [aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) [rnk@google.com](mailto:rnk@google.com)

* Action items from last meeting
  * [efriedma@quicinc.com](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) will update `restrict` RFC
    * RFC is going in the right direction now; no consensus, but everyone agrees
  * [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com): AI policy continues. [PR exists](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/154441)\!
    * Should really rewrite Developer Policy in markdown
    * OTOH we should focus on Petr’s project to create project-level docs
  * [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com) wanted to write up open project on driver configuration files, multilib.yaml
    * No updates 🙁
  * [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com) will update meeting slot to 1hr
    * Done
* RFC notes pulled from [Clang C/C++ Language Working Group Meetings](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1x5-RbOC6-jnI_NcJ9Dp4pSmGhhNe7lUevuWUIB46TeM/edit?tab=t.0)
  * Maintainer policy discussion ([thread](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/maintainer-policy-discussion/87663))
    * [Upstream LLVM Maintainer Policy](https://docs.google.com/document/d/13i-wU9s-0NoZtBnQn67dedtyc676nZliPVXFyE5u280/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.rynge1kd90is)
    * Discussed Reid’s comment on governance
    * Do maintainers have “no” power? Do they have “soft” power? Do we encourage committers to defer to maintainers, but the power to override hard blocking concerns lies with the area team leads?
    * Want to make maintainership as minimally burdensome as possible
    * Maintainer qualifications: given that maintainers are ultimately responsible for review, they should have the skills and expertise to review patches effectively themselves.
    * Aaron: Folks have applied to be maintainers, but when asked to do work and show evidence of it, few have followed up. Ambrose / Sirraede / AEternal is a success story
  * Maintainer list: Need to review it, mark inactive folks, propose new additions
  * Prepare for next area team lead election cycle
    * November is call for nominations
    * Continuity: How should we handle this? Two months / 3-4 meetings of overlap between area team members?
    * Term alternations? 2yr term, alternating expirations?
    * Term limits: We considered them, but dropped them out of a desire to
  * Hardening ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-hardening-mode-for-the-compiler/87660))
    * There was a discussion of this at the memory safety working group on Aug 7th
    * Aaron will be out, won’t work on this in Sept.
    * Need to keep gathering requirements
  * New text diagnostic format ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-add-a-new-text-diagnostics-format-that-supports-nested-diagnostics/87641))
    * Will go forward under an experimental feature flag 👍
    * Aaron will update the RFC to make it clear it’s okay to move forward with the flag
  * libc++ want to take dependency on Boost.Math ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-libc-taking-a-dependency-on-boost-math-for-the-c-17-math-special-functions/87479/40))
    * Which area team covers libc++ in general?
    * Do we need to form an area team?
    * Aaron: At the moment, project council. Would be worth testing the theory of passing up issues in uncovered subprojects to the project council.
    * The technical concerns (conduct aside) where around link errors (ODR violations) with duplicate symbols for Boost.Math and bootstrapping considerations.
    * Concern from the clang side is that these higher order math functions and then
  * `restrict` support ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-yet-another-llvm-restrict-support/87612))
    * Likely heading towards consensus against
    * Still want something along these lines; Jeroen’s patch is still not ready
    * Rust folks are interested in improved alias analysis
  * CHERI upstreaming ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-upstream-target-support-for-cheri-enabled-architectures/87623))
  * GitHub PR auto-merge feature ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-enable-github-auto-merge-feature/87547/19))
  * Driver option to select C standard library implementation ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-add-command-line-option-for-selecting-c-library/87335))

Action items:

- [ ] [aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) will tag clang maintainers on the google doc to get more feedback (John McCall, Ambrose, others)

## Aug 7, 2025 | [Clang area team meeting](https://www.google.com/calendar/event?eid=MGhocnA3bWFqN2Y5MDVhb2hzYjEzYmw2bHZfMjAyNTA2MjZUMTcwMDAwWiBybmtAbGx2bS5vcmc)

Attendees: [efriedma@quicinc.com](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) [aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) [rnk@google.com](mailto:rnk@google.com)

* Any major release blockers folks are aware of?
  * Folks are noticing enum constexpr conversion errors
  * Doesn’t seem to be release-blocking though; there were migration paths and it is possible to support old Clang and new Clang. Was just fixing issues and catching people by surprise.
  * Was mostly in Boost and Chrome, but those seem to be handled. If there are more complaints, we can downgrade to a warning if necessary
  * Do we have a policy on this? We take C++ DRs and implement them, what do we consider when adding new diagnostics (errors) that make upgrades difficult? In practice, we aim for conformance, but sometimes make concessions to practicalities about the realities of the C/C++ ecosystem, such as Boost.
* Hardening ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-hardening-mode-for-the-compiler/87660))
  * Active. Plan to have a meeting, but let’s allow folks to read and digest.
  * How do we feel about intent-based flags that change over time? (Tom’s concern)
  * Hardening recommendations will be ISA-specific, BTE (?) for ARM, etc.
    * Putting this in the compiler enables more user build system portability, don’t need ISA-specific flags.
  * User for `-fhardened` is unopinionated, they want the compiler’s recommendation. Depends on sophistication level of the user.
  * Various other pressures: ABI stability, GCC-compatibility, orthogonality, etc
  * Could try to relieve pressure by requiring the flag to decompose into multiple orthogonal flags for sophisticated users.
* New text diagnostic format ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-add-a-new-text-diagnostics-format-that-supports-nested-diagnostics/87641))
  * Active, no action necessary yet
* `restrict` support ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-yet-another-llvm-restrict-support/87612))
  * Jeroen’s work has been out there for some time
  * Clang area team statement should be that you can’t change the behavior of restrict to be different from the standard while still using the restrict keyword; maybe a different keyword is a better approach?
  * Should there be an LLVM IR Core Semantics working group to help with these kinds of issues?
  * See also C memory model [N3231](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg14/www/docs/n3231.pdf) (from TS 6010\)
  * In conclusion, the position of the Clang area team is that we can’t change the meaning of restrict to forbid capturing restricted pointers.
* Aside about community management:
  * Other communities use mailing lists, should we have some so we can cross-post again?
  * Moderation was an issue, GDPR takedown requests
  * Foundation probably would not want to host mailing list infrastructure again, but might not be opposed to paying for or using free managed services (Google Groups, other)
* Everything else looks good:
  * CHERI upstreaming ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-upstream-target-support-for-cheri-enabled-architectures/87623))
  * GitHub PR auto-merge feature ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-enable-github-auto-merge-feature/87547/19))
  * libc++ want to take dependency on Boost.Math ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-libc-taking-a-dependency-on-boost-math-for-the-c-17-math-special-functions/87479/40))
  * Driver option to select C standard library implementation ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-add-command-line-option-for-selecting-c-library/87335))
* Maintainer policy discussion ([thread](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/maintainer-policy-discussion/87663))
  * New, will read, look at more next time

Action items:

- [ ] [efriedma@quicinc.com](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) will update `restrict` RFC

## Jul 24, 2025 | [Clang area team meeting](https://www.google.com/calendar/event?eid=MGhocnA3bWFqN2Y5MDVhb2hzYjEzYmw2bHZfMjAyNTA2MjZUMTcwMDAwWiBybmtAbGx2bS5vcmc)

Attendees: [efriedma@quicinc.com](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) [aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) [rnk@google.com](mailto:rnk@google.com)

*
* Bounds safety RFC:
  * [https://gcc.gnu.org/pipermail/gcc-patches/2025-July/690024.html](https://gcc.gnu.org/pipermail/gcc-patches/2025-July/690024.html)
  * Discussion has moved over to GCC community after we pushed back
  * GCC concerns have less to do with late parsing than handling expressions during late parsing, simple identifiers are OK (i.e. can delay lookup for `n` where `n` is a parameter or field), challenge is `__counted_by( n * 8 + y)` type things
  * Maybe we could fence off expression parsing in another attribute
  * Reid:
  * Aaron: Would prefer to down-scope the proposal, just have a simple identifier attribute
  * Expression bounds use case: Byte swapping in expressions. Expressions are 10-15% of Linux annotation use cases. It’s a big win if we can make the 85% case easy and portable.
  * Yeoul & John McCall drafted a WG14 paper on their position, will mail it tomorrow
  * No actions for us as an area team.
  * C/C++ name lookup confusion. C has no syntax for disambiguating between struct [Foo.name](http://Foo.name) and global name
* Reflections on 64-bit sloc RFC
  * Should we add a CMake config to enable this? We don’t currently have one. (Reid was mistaken)
  * If we make this config, should there be a buildbot? Who owns it?
  * Haojian is OOO Aug and returning Sept
  * Next step: We propose on the RFC thread to make this a CMake config option. Does anyone object? Enables easy performance comparison. Should help some downstreams who are known to have this downstream.
* Clang extension criteria:
  * We need to update this. How do we measure value to the project?
  * Reid: Had convo with Shafik about this on Monday
  * Aaron: We could have checkboxes on value
  * It’s very difficult to remove extensions that go in and get rejected or modified during standardization, that’s why we have this policy
  * Chicken and egg problem: We don’t want non-standard extensions with users that we have to maintain indefinitely, we don’t want to add extensions and then break our users during standards changes
  * Reflection: We (?) spent 300+ hours on reflection in WG21
  * Incubator process challenge
  * Reid: Implementation cost burden of standardization
  * Aaron: We should have an “implementor’s caucus” for WG14
  * “Market pressure” for C++ features, leading to subpar implementations
    * Coroutines comes to mind
    * Reid: [https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/149604\#issuecomment-3105404805](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/149604#issuecomment-3105404805)
    * Eli objected to the unprincipled LICM spot fix: [https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/149936](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/149936)
    * What we really have here is a design flaw
  * Modules is another example: Lots of effort was put into designing a principled feature, and WG21 threw us some bones, and standardized something that is unsustainable for us to support (see 64-bit sloc)
  * Reid: The main thing to think about here is how to make our project more sustainable, how do we grow the project. If we’re being honest, this is hard work, requiring dedication, usually from folks with full-time employment, who have bandwidth to spend 30%+ of their time on community review
  * Aaron: Coming back to the implementor’s caucus idea: Our opinions may carry more weight if we speak together.
  * Reid: Implementor veto: Standards features get implemented, but the less implementor buy-in you have, the more it gets delayed, and the lower the quality is
  * Perhaps explaining the importance of implementor buy-in to standards community members
* AMD predicate proposal:
  * We should revisit this
* Overflow type specifiers:
  * Aaron has the review
  * Should we call consensus? Formally accept it?
* RFC to add a flag to select the C standard library
* Source code renaming?
  * Apple libtool that maybe can be replaced by an LLVM tool?
* Multlib.yaml ?
* Reid: Next time, let’s discuss open meetings, or expanding the area team

Action Items:

- [ ] [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com): AI policy continues
- [ ] [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com) wanted to write up open project on driver configuration files, multilib.yaml
- [x] ~~[aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) will post a comment suggesting updating the RFC to use a cmake flag and check for community objections, but seems like a good compromise~~
- [ ] [efriedma@quicinc.com](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) will take a pass over RFCs for the next area team meeting
- [x] ~~[Aaron Ballman](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com)to comment on the Overflow Behavior Types RFC to see if there are objections to calling consensus on the proposal~~
- [ ] [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com) will update meeting slot to 1hr

## Jul 10, 2025 | [Clang area team meeting](https://www.google.com/calendar/event?eid=MGhocnA3bWFqN2Y5MDVhb2hzYjEzYmw2bHZfMjAyNTA2MjZUMTcwMDAwWiBybmtAbGx2bS5vcmc)

Attendees: [efriedma@quicinc.com](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) [aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) (Reid is out on vacation)

* We got a request to schedule a meeting about the 64-bit source location RFC from the Clang C/C++ Language Working Group
  * They would like both the PR author and Michael Spencer to be required participants
  * Working group is not opposed to the RFC (presuming the RFC authors are able to claw back the performance before landing source location changes)
  * However, the working group thinks that the reason we’re running out of source locations isn’t because of the size of the TUs being compiled but because we’re creating unique source locations (grabbing an ID for them) to represent the same physical source location within the file. There’s a thought that perhaps we can do something about that duplication which will then lead to not exhausting the source location ID space.
  * The group doesn’t think that Clang can handle 2 billion \*unique\* source locations; that’s a massive TU for which we’d likely hit plenty of other problems. If that’s incorrect, it’d be good to know that.
  * Eli: the authors seemed to have issues with modules due to the same textual include getting into multiple modules, so the duplicate source locations actually \*are\* distinct.
  * We’ll schedule a call just to make sure everyone is on the same page. **Aaron will schedule the call.**
* How do we improve communication of decisions to avoid outcomes like the bounds safety RFC?
  * We need to get the governance documentation somewhere more official than proposals website. This helps people understand area teams in general.
  * We should document the Clang Area Team’s approach to gathering feedback. The feedback on this decision showed that folks who aren’t heavily involved in the day to day running of the project are unaware that these decisions are made based on feedback from everywhere we can gather it, not just the bits they can readily see.
  * When giving negative feedback, we should spend more time explaining how a decision was reached. We gave just the result of the discussion, which is important, but the \*why\* is equally as important to patch authors.
  * We should be more careful about decisions in RFC “groups” where there’s multiple RFCs on the same topic. I think we weren’t sufficiently clear that the recommendation we made was about bounds safety in general being safe for folks to continue to work on while the details of Bill’s proposal get worked out. I think we did that because we see these as all being one big RFC on the same topic, but the authors obviously don’t see it the same way.
  * Aaron: I think we need to do better at pulling together context for folks. We’re deeply embedded in the community and so it’s easy for us to forget that others don’t have the same level of visibility into where discussions happen. We should pull that information together when giving a “no” kind of answer so it’s easier to see this was a community-based decision, not a fiat decision.
  * Eli: yeah, that makes sense
  * Eli: clearly we needed to do something because the discussion was going nowhere, but I didn’t have the full debate in my head at once. The goal is transparency, so area team decisions should not be surprising to anyone. If they are, then we’ve failed at communicating somewhere.
  * Aaron: agreed, good way of putting it – area team decisions shouldn’t be a surprise to the people most deeply involved in the discussion
  * **Aaron draft a response to the RFC, Eli to review**
  * Aaron: also, minuting is a terrible way to determine what was discussed at a meeting, but what do we do instead? Bill read our minutes, but they can’t capture all the details of the discussion. Is there a way to do better?
  * Eli: yeah, I think all we can do is incorporating the technical points brought up in the discussion into the public response so that people don’t need to go to the minutes. Or we could do it via public meetings for a specific topics, but I don’t know how that helpful that would be for decision-making. I appreciate that we can have non-public debate because it allows more honesty, especially when there are multiple different groups debating a topic.
  * Aaron: yeah, I also appreciate having a private meeting so we can discuss things like how to improve our own processes. The public meetings should be where technical discussion happened and the decisions should be sufficiently obvious that they’re not happening in private anyway.
  * Eli: it’s good that this happened early in the lifetime of the area team and with a group reasonably friendly to our community and without major public explosions or impact.
  * Aaron: agreed
* Community AI policy is starting to cause significant friction in practice; I’d very much like to see it modified to ban use of AI when someone asks for it to not be used.
  * Example: [https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/147400](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/147400), [https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/139037](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/139037), [https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/72413](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/72413)
  * It’s not good use of reviewer time to begin with, but more importantly: it puts the onus on the community to find a polite way to say “we don’t think there’s any human thought being put into this and it’s wasting time”
  * I’ve been getting reviewer complaints, in particular about the amount of time these kinds of exchanges waste in practice.
  * Probably a community-wide decision, I’m happy to write an RFC, but I’m wondering if there’s support from the Clang Area Team as a whole.
  * Eli: I’ve only seen this once or twice. The issue is that they’re using AI as a substitute for their own understanding. It seems like we don’t need an official policy that copy/pasting someone else’s work is not okay. Maybe change the policy to say not to copy/paste AI responses?
  * Aaron: other projects have banned use of AI entirely (curl, for example). Use of AI for fancy autocomplete is fine, but use of AI for vibe coding is not. No idea how to make that a policy though.
  * Eli: I think maybe we can sell a policy on not using AI for conversation and code generation.
  * Aaron: Should this be an RFC from the area team?
  * Eli: Probably not, I don’t think we should use that unless it’s specifically a request from the community to the area team
  * Aaron: I can propose it as a personal RFC then. The feedback I’ve gotten privately was not specifically “area team go solve this”.
* Opens
  * Aaron: going on sabbatical for the month of Sept. Do we need a succession plan for me as lead maintainer?
  * Eli: usually individual maintainers can handle stuff, so between that and the area team, we should be able to handle most things
  * Aaron: cool, I’ll do what I usually do for vacation: post to Discourse, mention “talk to so and so”.
  * Eli: we had action item last time for an LLVM Dev conference talk, I think Reid was going to take that.
  * Aaron: He’s out on vacation, so I’m guessing he’s either already submitted something and we’ll find out what later, or he’s not going to have time before the deadline.
  * Aaron: I’m planning to give a state of Clang talk again, assuming I can get the data out of git and github that I want to get. I know there are other Clang talks being proposed; one about UB from Shafik, perhaps a panel discussion on how to get started contributing to Clang from Corentin.

## Jun 26, 2025 | [Clang area team meeting](https://www.google.com/calendar/event?eid=MGhocnA3bWFqN2Y5MDVhb2hzYjEzYmw2bHZfMjAyNTA2MjZUMTcwMDAwWiBybmtAbGx2bS5vcmc)

Attendees: [efriedma@quicinc.com](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) [aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@llvm.org) ~~[Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com)~~

Notes

* Do we want to present something at the LLVM Developer Conference this Fall from the Clang Area Team?
  * Perhaps a talk about how governance has been going, what’s working well, what can be improved?
  * How to avoid one company dominating direction with an open source project like ours.
  * Action Item: Reid to draft a proposal, Aaron to help review. CFP deadline July 15

  \[RFC\] \[C++\] \[Modules\] Stop using abbrev and drop the maintainance [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-c-modules-stop-using-abbrev-and-drop-the-maintainance/87063/](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-c-modules-stop-using-abbrev-and-drop-the-maintainance/87063/)

* Ongoing discussion, nothing to be done yet
  Revisiting 64-bit source locations [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/revisiting-64-bit-source-locations/86556/](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/revisiting-64-bit-source-locations/86556/)
* Decided that if they can claw back the performance loss, it's okay to move forward
* Michael Spencer said privately that this is still not a good idea, if you have \> 2GB of source location information, there's almost no chance you're going to avoid hitting other implementation limits we track via bit-fields. So we may solve one problem only to find we have hundreds of new problems to address
  * [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@llvm.org): I guess I’d want to know more about this, I thought it was purely a sloc exhaustion issue, not an AST node blowup issue. (long declaration chains, duplicated AST nodes in the PCM)
  * Michael (or others) should bring this up in the thread with more context so the community can discuss the tradeoffs.
  * Barring that, status quo is that the RFC can move forward if the performance is clawed back first

  \[RFC\] Support Target Triple Specific Include Paths Derived from Sysroot via multilib.yaml or Driver Logic [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-support-target-triple-specific-include-paths-derived-from-sysroot-via-multilib-yaml-or-driver-logic/86925](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-support-target-triple-specific-include-paths-derived-from-sysroot-via-multilib-yaml-or-driver-logic/86925)

* 9 days old, not getting much attention from the community
* Seems more like a feature request than a bug fix
* Got feedback yesterday, good feature, let’s see it advance
  \[RFC\] Take libstdc++ into account during GCC detection [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-take-libstdc-into-account-during-gcc-detection/86992](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-take-libstdc-into-account-during-gcc-detection/86992)
* 6 days old, not getting much attention from the community
* Seems more like a bug fix, mostly looking for which approach works best
* Important problem to solve because of how often users hit it in practice
* Nobody likes the existing behavior
* Reid: write something up in this space as an Open Project for Clang
  \[RFC v2\] \[Clang\] Introduce OverflowBehaviorTypes (for wrapping and non-wrapping arithmetic) [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-v2-clang-introduce-overflowbehaviortypes-for-wrapping-and-non-wrapping-arithmetic/86507/](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-v2-clang-introduce-overflowbehaviortypes-for-wrapping-and-non-wrapping-arithmetic/86507/)
* Discussion on-going
* RFC author is out until beginning of July
  RFC: Bounds Safety in C Syntax Compatibility with GCC [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-bounds-safety-in-c-syntax-compatibility-with-gcc/85885/](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-bounds-safety-in-c-syntax-compatibility-with-gcc/85885/)
* Need to get to a decision, starting to get folks privately emailing me about wanting to help but feeling like there's no clear path forward
* Starting to become clear that there’s not going to be consensus between Clang and GCC on a language feature for parameters and structure members.
* We should communicate now that the GCC forward declaration is not something we support and will not be going with. Maybe that helps move the discussion forward
* Apple can keep upstreaming what they’ve already got downstream without concern for GCC compatibility.
* Action: Aaron will leave a comment on the RFC; if folks want to discuss further, we’re open to another meeting

\[AMDGPU\]\[clang\]\[CodeGen\]\[opt\] Add late-resolved feature identifying predicates [https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/134016/](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/134016/)

* Review is stuck on design concerns, perhaps worth scheduling a call?
* We should have a principled solution for subtarget features at the expression level rather than the function level.
* That’s a bit of a cross-cutting project, the backends aren’t prepared to handle that. CPU backends would maybe give up.
* Maybe something like what we do for funclets?
* When in the LLVM project roadmap will MLIR regions get backported to LLVM IR?
* Likely needs to be a frontend solution so we can leave LLVM changes out of scope, if possible
* Our bar for quality is higher than backend errors
* Consensus that the PR as-is is not acceptable, but we don’t have a better solution either. More discussion is needed (iterate on the design a bit).

Action items

- [ ] Reid to draft a proposal for LLVM developer conference, Aaron to help review. CFP deadline July 15
- [ ] Aaron to leave a comment on the RFC: Bounds Safety in C Syntax Compatibility with GCC
- [ ] Reid to write an Open Project for GCC/MSVC path discovery

Copy-pasta:
LLVM Discussion Forums
[\[RFC\] \[C++\] \[Modules\] Stop using abbrev and drop the maintainance](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-c-modules-stop-using-abbrev-and-drop-the-maintainance/87063/)
Audience Module users and vendors (including PCH, clang modules, objc modules and standard c++ modules (header units) and named modules) and clang developers who needs to create new or change existing AST types (roughly the guys who work with C++ language committee) Problem If you had ever the experience that you add/change some attributes in ...
Image
LLVM Discussion Forums
[Revisiting 64-bit source locations](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/revisiting-64-bit-source-locations/86556/)
The 64-bit source locations have been proposed and discussed a few times in the past (1, 2), but the discussions have stalled without a final solution. I’d like to bring this back with fresh data and a prototype. The motivation: with C++ modules becoming more common, we’re running into SourceLocation exhaustion more frequently. This issue i...
Image
LLVM Discussion Forums
[\[RFC\] Support Target Triple Specific Include Paths Derived from Sys...](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-support-target-triple-specific-include-paths-derived-from-sysroot-via-multilib-yaml-or-driver-logic/86925)
Hi all, This RFC proposes enabling support for target-triple-specific include paths derived from the sysroot in the baremetal Driver. This feature is particularly valuable in environments where headers are common and arranged under target-triple-specific directories. We propose two solutions even though configuring the include paths through mu...
Image
LLVM Discussion Forums
[\[RFC\] Take libstdc++ into account during GCC detection](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-take-libstdc-into-account-during-gcc-detection/86992)
Problem statement The default C++ standard library used by Clang on GNU/Linux systems is GCC’s libstdc++. To find this library, among other things, Clang needs the path to a GCC installation directory which is autodetected (see class Generic\_GCC::GCCInstallationDetector) unless the user provides it explicitly on the command line. The detectio...
Image
LLVM Discussion Forums
[\[RFC v2\] \[Clang\] Introduce OverflowBehaviorTypes (for wrapping and ...](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-v2-clang-introduce-overflowbehaviortypes-for-wrapping-and-non-wrapping-arithmetic/86507/)
Support the Linux kernel’s need for defining overflow resolution behavior for types at the source level by introducing OverflowBehaviorTypes to Clang’s type system. Key discussion areas for this RFC include C++ support, narrowing semantics and other design or implementation topics. This RFC is a follow-up to \[RFC\] \[Clang\] Canonical wrappin...
Image

*

## Jun 12, 2025 | [Clang area team meeting](https://www.google.com/calendar/event?eid=MGhocnA3bWFqN2Y5MDVhb2hzYjEzYmw2bHZfMjAyNTA2MTJUMTcwMDAwWiBybmtAZ29vZ2xlLmNvbQ)

Attendees: [Eli Friedman](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com) [Aaron Ballman](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) [rnk@llvm.org](mailto:rnk@llvm.org)

Notes

* Vector deleting destructor for MSVC
  * Eli approved, but needs additional expertise
  * Reid: Want to review this, but work demands are
* Aaron: Getting interest in \_Optional for WG14
* Integer wrapping and overflow: What are next steps
  * [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-v2-clang-introduce-overflowbehaviortypes-for-wrapping-and-non-wrapping-arithmetic/86507](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-v2-clang-introduce-overflowbehaviortypes-for-wrapping-and-non-wrapping-arithmetic/86507)
  * Type specifier adds cascading behavior on “usual arithmetic operations”
  * Conclusion: Aaron will think more on it, he found the argument that \_NoWrap is a type specifier compelling
* Bounds safety: Need to revisit this, no update yet
  * Discussed it in Clang lang WG call yesterday
  * [Clang C/C++ Language Working Group Meetings](https://docs.google.com/document/u/0/d/1x5-RbOC6-jnI_NcJ9Dp4pSmGhhNe7lUevuWUIB46TeM/edit)
  * Reservations about exposing this in C++. The intention is that this stuff is used by C system headers, which has to be parseable from C++.
  * Reid: The core of the disagreement is about balancing the needs of the GCC C frontend against additional complexity for the Clang C/C++ compilation mode.
  * Reid: We should schedule something in the second half of July, we know we’re going to need it, there’s a long way between now and then, we’ll see how things develop and cancel if we don’t need it.
  * Reid:
* 64-bit source locations
  * Eli: Opportunity to optimize DeclRefExpr to reduce memory usage
  * Aaron: If we lose 4%, it’s probably easier to make up elsewhere
  * Aaron will comment on next steps: Optimize DRE, profile, look for usage elsewhere, try to pay for it
* Delayed typo correction removal:
  * Done deal
* PSTL:
  * Waiting until WG21, proposed removal
* `-fsanitize=undefined` removing vptr:
  * Reid:

Action items

- [ ] Reid: Will schedule call on bounds safety

## May 29, 2025 | [Clang area team meeting](https://www.google.com/calendar/event?eid=MGhocnA3bWFqN2Y5MDVhb2hzYjEzYmw2bHZfMjAyNTA1MjlUMTcwMDAwWiBybmtAZ29vZ2xlLmNvbQ)

Attendees: [Eli Friedman](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com) [Aaron Ballman](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) [rnk@llvm.org](mailto:rnk@llvm.org)

Notes

* RFC roundup:
  * [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-intra-procedural-lifetime-analysis-in-clang/86291](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-intra-procedural-lifetime-analysis-in-clang/86291)
  * 64-bit slocs, again: [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/revisiting-64-bit-source-locations/86556](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/revisiting-64-bit-source-locations/86556)
    * Relative source locations? Decls hold cache, Decl local
    * Reid: Has anyone explored the direction of fighting against these O(m \* n) dynamics? Sounds like no
* Reid going to OSSummit NA, any contacts, things to try to learn?
* Typo correction: Sounds like we have a direction, sunset, disable delayed corrections
* Recap of last RFC area team meeting
  * We should clarify that participants should already be familiar with the topic
  * Whoever sets up the next call should write up this default agenda, and we’ll roll that into the next post inviting folks to the next RFC call
  * Emphasize that folks should bring their concerns
* [https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/138227\#issuecomment-2911002534](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/138227#issuecomment-2911002534) seeking area team input
  * Revert policy: Should revisit refreshing that, covering what is reasonable
* Reid: We should write down our escalation policy:
  * Local maintainer
  * Lead maintainer
  * Local area team
  * Project council
* AI & diagnostic translation:
  * First, translation infrastructure needs to be created so we can maintain translations in source
  * Second, for any language, we need a human domain expert willing to review translations
  * We would accept machine generated translations, even from AI tools, if the translation maintainer is satisfied with the quality and is willing to review issues and patches to tweak the translations
  * If and when a translation maintainer leaves the project or becomes inactive, we may remove diagnostic translations in the future, as we might remove any other dormant, unmaintained functionality.

Action items

- [ ]

## May 15, 2025 | [Clang area team meeting](https://www.google.com/calendar/event?eid=MGhocnA3bWFqN2Y5MDVhb2hzYjEzYmw2bHZfMjAyNTA1MTVUMTcwMDAwWiBybmtAbGx2bS5vcmc)

Attendees: [efriedma@quicinc.com](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) [rnk@google.com](mailto:rnk@google.com) [aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) [rnk@llvm.org](mailto:rnk@llvm.org)

Notes

* RFC roundup: didn’t have time, Aaron took a pass, didn’t see a need to step in
  * Have upcoming bounds safety call
  * Implicit constexpr: done
  * PMF: Done
  * Type-aware allocation: Done
  * HIP & CUDA:
    * Reid: As an OSS compiler, our interests point in the direction of standardization, alignment, to reduce maintenance costs. Our natural interest is to align offloading, HIP, CUDA, whatever, as much as humanly possible
* Typo Correction: This is unmaintained, we don’t have an active maintainer, it’s not a priority for Google, how should we handle this as a community?
  * Reid: Modules essentially prioritizes ahead of all diagnostic quality improvements
  * Bug policy: Document that we don’t care about bugs that don’t repro without \-ftypo-correction
  * [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/need-a-maintainer-for-typo-correction/86360/1](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/need-a-maintainer-for-typo-correction/86360/1)
  * Reid: a lot of the complexity has to do with delayed typo correction
  * Consensus: If we can remove delayed typo expression handling, that seems to solve a significant part of the problem. Perhaps that can be disabled by default until we get a dedicated maintainer
* Pull request RFC: WDYT about policy that every change should have a PR?
  * Eli: Post-commit review is way down since we’ve left llvm-commits behind. The commit page isn’t great for post-commit discussion.
  * Aaron: I do a ton of no-review doc update commits, so I’m greatly impacted, but
* Eli: How can we make it easier for people to ask the compiler to generate hardened code?
  * Reid: “Intent-based build configs”
  * Aaron has a draft RFC on this topic
  * High-level intents: Can we delegate this to a config file? Should we invest in improving Clang driver configuration?

Action items

- [ ]

---

## May 1, 2025 | [Clang area team meeting](https://www.google.com/calendar/event?eid=MGhocnA3bWFqN2Y5MDVhb2hzYjEzYmw2bHZfMjAyNTA1MDFUMTcwMDAwWiBybmtAbGx2bS5vcmc)

Attendees: [efriedma@quicinc.com](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com) [aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@llvm.org)

Possible RFC list

* [\[RFC\] Add a warning when bypassing the premerge testing](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-add-a-warning-when-bypassing-the-premerge-testing/77610) (LLVM Project)
  * Project wide, quick smell check. Should this block on the migration from buildkite to GHA?
* [\[RFC\] LLVM\_LINK\_LLVM\_DYLIB should default to ON on Posix platforms](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-llvm-link-llvm-dylib-should-default-to-on-on-posix-platforms/85908) (LLVM Project)
  * My RFC. Not really clang, but we should think about following up with the same for Clang.
* [RFC: Bounds Safety in C Syntax Compatibility with GCC (Clang Frontend)](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-bounds-safety-in-c-syntax-compatibility-with-gcc/85885/20)
  * Need to prioritize this
  * Next step is probably setting up a meeting with:
    * Bill Wendling
    * Yeoul
    * Martin Uecker (GCC)
    * Clang Area Team
    * Erich? John McCall?
  * Aaron will get a date from the above parties and Reid will schedule the call
* [\[RFC\] Summary Based Analysis Prototype (Clang Frontend, Static Analyzer)](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-summary-based-analysis-prototype/85945/20)
* [\[RFC\] \-fimplicit-constexpr (Clang Frontend, clang)](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-fimplicit-constexpr/85963/19)
  * ATLs feel there is insufficient motivation to merge this, especially if it’s for experimentation.
  * Reid will respond to this
* [\[RFC\] Implement gcc Bound PMF in clang (Clang Frontend, clang)](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-implement-gcc-bound-pmf-in-clang/85951/6)
  * This is super niche. Main blocker is, how much implementation complexity does it create?
  * Motivation is “early binding”, performance
  * Eli: GCC’s implementation is non-portable, assumes the ABI doesn’t have rules about member functions
  * Long-tail GCC compat isn’t feasible anyway, this is not our top priority w.r.t. Compatibility
  * Eli will respond to this
* [\[RFC\] Experimental implementation of P2719 \- Type-aware allocation and deallocation functions (Clang Frontend, clang, rfc)](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-experimental-implementation-of-p2719-type-aware-allocation-and-deallocation-functions/83876/8)
  * Latest discussion is about how to get early access to the feature before it is standards-approved.
  * Options:
    * Approve a feature branch under [github.com/llvm/llvm-project](http://github.com/llvm/llvm-project) , tell users to use that
    * Merge it to \`main\` under a flag
  * Aaron: WG21 has moved the paper to Core for wording, still undergoing some wording review and minor changes but should not have any substantial design changes from here out
  * Makes sense to land this under \-std=c++26, any minor revisions from the committee will happen before C++26 is finalized, so we have some latitude for breaking changes.
  * If getting user feedback requires a \-f flag so it can be enabled outside of C++26, that may be reasonable as well (important part is guarding it behind a flag so we restrict how many users might start relying on the current behavior until the committee finalizes the feature).
  * Aaron will respond to this
* [\[RFC\] convergence in C++ languages such as HIP, CUDA, OpenCL (Clang Frontend)](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-convergence-in-c-languages-such-as-hip-cuda-opencl/85920)
  * Needs GPU target expertise. Author is from AMD. Throw this to Erich?
* [\[RFC\] New proposed Managarm support for LLVM and Clang (\#87845) (Clang Frontend)](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-new-proposed-managarm-support-for-llvm-and-clang-87845/85884/1)
* [\[RFC\] Make \`-Wreturn-type\` an error *by default* (Clang Frontend)](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-make-wreturn-type-an-error-by-default/85775/10)
  * Aaron identified next steps
* [\[RFC\] Introducing elementwise clz/ctz builtins (Clang Frontend, clang)](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-introducing-elementwise-clz-ctz-builtins/85862/1)
* [\[RFC\] Function type attribute to prevent CFI instrumentation (Clang Frontend, rfc)](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/135836/files)
  * Ship it
* \[RFC\] YAMLGenerateSchema support for producing YAML schemas (LLVM Project, llvm, clang, core, rfc, clang-format)
* \[RFC\] Support YAMLGenerateSchema for producing YAML schemas (Project Infrastructure, LLVM Dev List Archives, llvm)
* [Splitting clang’s CGBuiltin.cpp – over 23k lines long, takes \> 1min to compile](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/splitting-clang-s-cgbuiltin-cpp-over-23k-lines-long-takes-1min-to-compile/83763)
* RFC: Structure protection, a family of UAF mitigation techniques (LLVM Project)
* \[RFC\] report\_fatal\_error and the default value of GenCrashDialog (LLVM Project, llvm, clang, mlir, core)
* [RFC: (Forward) referencing a struct member within bounds annotations (Clang Frontend)](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-forward-referencing-a-struct-member-within-bounds-annotations/85510/2)
* [Let’s get Clang’s diagnostics translatable\!](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/lets-get-clangs-diagnostics-translatable/67094)
* [RFC: Alternative spellings of OpenMP directives (Clang Frontend, openmp)](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-alternative-spellings-of-openmp-directives/85507/1)
  * Call it handled.
* [\[RFC\] \-fdebugger-support for CXX (Clang Frontend)](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-fdebugger-support-for-cxx/86046/5)
  * Next steps clear, skip

Notes:

* Modules discussion:
  * [\[RFC\] Extensions to export macros/(preprocessor states) for C++20 modules (Clang Frontend)](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-extensions-to-export-macros-preprocessor-states-for-c-20-modules/85083/83)
  * Our outcome was extremely close to “no”. Should we just say no?
  * We should also weight the opinions of contributors partially by their contributions
  * Meeting was also weighted towards implementors. It would be good to get more user feedback.
*

Action items

- [ ]

## Apr 17, 2025 | [Clang area team meeting](https://www.google.com/calendar/event?eid=MGhocnA3bWFqN2Y5MDVhb2hzYjEzYmw2bHZfMjAyNTA0MDNUMTcwMDAwWiBybmtAbGx2bS5vcmc)

Attendees: [efriedma@quicinc.com](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) [aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com)

Notes

* Aaron still needs to schedule the call for Modules and Macros discussion
* Any changes needed for [\-fdollars-in-identifiers PR](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/135407)? Or does it seem like that’s a bad idea and we should back off from it?
  * Best to disable the diagnostic in asm preprocessing mode and float those changes
  * Nothing is on fire, so we don’t need to rush a change here
  * Current plan is to update the PR and wait-and-see how the discussion goes on the PR, this may require an RFC though.
* Do we want to schedule a call for \-Wreturn-type?
  * Not  yet, the main folks discussing it seem to be reaching an agreement that is effectively “don’t change severity” \+ “make a fix it” \+ “propose a hardening RFC”
  * Aaron has a draft for that hardening RFC started, still working on it though. That one is expected to end up in the area team at some point though
* We looked through the current list of RFCs and did not see any that seemed to be struggling to make progress. We noted that the bounds safety attribute argument parsing discussion has restarted and we’ll keep an eye on that before scheduling anything there.
* We need to improve documentation regarding Area Teams, Aaron can try to draft some, but likely not until May

## Apr 4, 2025 | [Clang area team meeting](https://www.google.com/calendar/event?eid=MGhocnA3bWFqN2Y5MDVhb2hzYjEzYmw2bHZfMjAyNTA0MDNUMTcwMDAwWiBybmtAbGx2bS5vcmc)

Attendees: [efriedma@quicinc.com](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com) [aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@llvm.org)

Notes

* Discussing the Foundation / Community / Area team relationship, liaison relationship
  * In LP-0004: "The \_project council\_ will elect from among themselves a secretary who will take notes of all meetings, a chair who facilitates meetings, and a liaison to the LLVM Foundation to manage the relationship between the \_project council\_ and the LLVM Foundation."
  * Reflecting on the old IWG: Maybe it failed due to a lack of clear communication between the board and the IWG
* Re: organization, Discourse has groups, so this can be used to @ tag area teams or other groups and teams.
  * Replicate this on github so in both contexts it’s the same approach: teams & project council can be @ mentioned
  * Plan is to use github issues and projects to track RFCs that area teams are looking at
  * Project council: All meetings open
  * Reid: I’m open to open area team meetings, my main concern was limiting the size of the meeting
* Modules RFC: Feels like it’s time to set up a discussion
  * Seems to lack consensus. We should identify next steps.
  * [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@llvm.org): With EuroLLVM travel, I don’t expect to have time to organize the RFC call, so that will have to be handled by Aaron and Eli
* Report\_fatal\_error RFC:
  * [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-report-fatal-error-and-the-default-value-of-gencrashdialog/73587/20](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-report-fatal-error-and-the-default-value-of-gencrashdialog/73587/20)
  * Probably doesn’t need our input
* Parameter / structure field lookup forward references RFC
  * [http://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-forward-referencing-a-struct-member-within-bounds-annotations/85510](http://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-forward-referencing-a-struct-member-within-bounds-annotations/85510)
  * Keep an eye on this, doesn’t need a call yet.
  * GCC uses this forward declared parameter approach because they lack an AST for the parameter list at the time that they need to do lookup
* Are we going to track RFCs with github?
  * Eli: What restrictions do we need? How do we discourage technical conversations in our tracker? Do we need to block write access beyond our project? Or even if we can’t provide write access, we can delete comments and moderate.

Action items

- [ ] [aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) will schedule RFC call for macros in named C++ modules

## Mar 20, 2025 | [Clang area team meeting](https://www.google.com/calendar/event?eid=MGhocnA3bWFqN2Y5MDVhb2hzYjEzYmw2bHZfMjAyNTAzMjBUMTcwMDAwWiBybmtAZ29vZ2xlLmNvbQ)

Attendees: [Eli Friedman](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com) [Aaron Ballman](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) [rnk@llvm.org](mailto:rnk@llvm.org)

Notes

* Reflections on wrap/unwrap RFC
  * Went well
  * Reflections on relationship between kernel developers and compiler developers. We are all low-level systems programmers, we’re more alike than we are different.
  * As an implementation, we clearly need to see C++ as in scope, even though proposal authors may understandably wish to limit scope
  * Area team involvement was pretty light, this was mostly about prompting proposal authors and commenters to meet
    * Proposers and reviewers don’t tend to self-organize into synchronous calls
    * The area team creates value by creating a mediated, shared space to organize the call
  * Time: 30 minutes? Only ran over 5-6 minutes. Maybe consider 45min, even though it’s awkward for scheduling
  * Should get feedback from Kees, Justin, James, others
* What is next step on communicating about ClangIR? Our “official” view of the next steps would probably help the project move forward.
  * Reid: I like what Aaron said about training a trusted reviewer. Perhaps we could outline that process more publicly, since it’s a good general principle about how we delegate review authority in an open source project where community review resources are scarce.
* Schedule future RFC review calls
  * [\[RFC\] Extensions to export macros/(preprocessor states) for C++20 modules](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-extensions-to-export-macros-preprocessor-states-for-c-20-modules/85083/28)
    * Aaron: Conversation is still active, this could benefit from a call, but is it time yet?
    * [efriedma@quicinc.com](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com): Need to close the gap between the “standards committee vision” and the “use in practice” camps, conversation is going in circles around this point
    * Timezones might make this challenging.
    * For language barrier reasons, we should encourage folks to use the CC button on Google Meet (assuming we use it)
    * [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com) My (poor) understanding is:
      * WG21 really wanted C++ users to “know”, implicitly, that `import named_module` doesn’t bring in any macros (if I see an import, I don’t need to defend my code against macro conflicts)
      * In practice, this is a huge practical barrier to adoption. Nobody is adopting named modules.
      * The RFC proposes to make exporting macros an module implementer choice. Now I have the option to define and export macros explicitly as part of my module interface.
    * Tradeoff: Enabling named modules to export macros is more practical, but it compromises WG21’s perhaps overly idealistic goal of a macro-free future.
    * Technical point: Do we allow curated macro export lists, or do we enable wildcard exporting of all macros? This opens the door to passing through system header macros, leading to conflicts
    * Aaron: Users say our module support is better than all other impls despite the fact that we don’t advertise it
    * Reid: Hyperscalers have modules, others don’t, see analogy to “hyperscalers vs open web” in [https://httptoolkit.com/blog/http3-quic-open-source-support-nowhere/](https://httptoolkit.com/blog/http3-quic-open-source-support-nowhere/)
    * **Decision: let’s schedule it**
  * [RFC: Add Clang attribute to ensure that fields are initialized explicitly](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-add-clang-attribute-to-ensure-that-fields-are-initialized-explicitly/80626/67)
    * Needs next steps, might be easy to provide them.
    * Actually, might be resolved
  * **AI: Eli and Aaron pick something, and we decide offline**

Action items

- [ ]

## Mar 6, 2025 | [Clang area team meeting](https://www.google.com/calendar/event?eid=MGhocnA3bWFqN2Y5MDVhb2hzYjEzYmw2bHZfMjAyNTAzMDZUMTgwMDAwWiBybmtAZ29vZ2xlLmNvbQ)

Attendees: [Eli Friedman](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com) [Aaron Ballman](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) [rnk@llvm.org](mailto:rnk@llvm.org)

RFCs: (discourse search: [clang RFC after:2025-02-01](https://discourse.llvm.org/search?q=clang%20rfc%20after%3A2025-02-01%20order%3Alatest))

* [\[RFC\] Upstreaming ClangIR](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-upstreaming-clangir/76587)
  * You all are probably aware of this, it is long-running. It had an update 22 days ago.
  * Reid: Even if we don’t have next steps to add right now, we should discuss how this is going to fit into the project. Will this be a niche feature to support new fancy features like coroutines and offloading to targets with CFG structure requirements, or are we adding a full representational shift to the standard pipeline?
    * Given the current distribution of compile times, I don’t think users will tolerate a flat \~50% increase in compile time, which is my minimum estimate for the cost.
    * I assume we will merge this feature because there is sufficient demand from multiple major contributors, but that it will somewhat fracture the ecosystem.
  * Aaron: I’ve been assuming that this has been accepted, but we could clarify that
  * Big time gap between “acceptance” and actual upstreaming activity
  * Community review takes a long time. It requires scarce community resources. What is the model for major feature contribution? Build trust with initial skeleton under community review, designating the trusted lead maintainer, having them do the review, and holding the maintainer accountable for upholding a high quality bar
    * ClangIR is going down this path. Andy Kaylor @ nvidia is helping do the implementation
  * Coding conventions (naming, capitalization, etc) clash. This eats a lot of review time. MLIR has a style, CIR adopted it, it differs from Clang/LLVM.
* [\[RFC\] \_\_has\_builtin behavior on offloading targets](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-has-builtin-behavior-on-offloading-targets/84964/11)
  * Proposal to deprecate `__has_builtin` and replace it with `__can_use_builtin`,
  * Reid: I wouldn’t churn this old, stable interface just for offloading targets. I think most users don’t use offloading, so this would be a lot of churn for them for marginal gain.
  * Maybe our role here is to say that it’s OK for `__has_builtin` to change semantics (arguably breaking some use cases), and that this is a better tradeoff for users than massive API churn.
* [\[RFC\] \[Clang\] Canonical wrapping and non-wrapping types](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-clang-canonical-wrapping-and-non-wrapping-types/84356)
  * \_Wrap & \_NoWrap
  * Has some opposition and input from Eli, defer to him
  * Original proposal had design issues about not modelling these as real types. New proposal tracks qualifiers correctly.
  * Open question: Is it worth it? Do we like the syntax? Should \`\_NoWrap unsigned\` add UB?
  * Valid use case for declaring that some integer \*will\* overflow. Otherwise they reach for \`unsigned\`, but then we have sanitizers that look for unsigned overflow since that’s usually a bug…
  * Aaron: Standards body consensus is that they regret adding signedness to the type system, they wish it was tracked per expression, like LLVM IR
  * Reid: \`a %+ b\` ?
  * In C++
* [\[RFC\] Experimental implementation of P2719 \- Type-aware allocation and deallocation functions](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-experimental-implementation-of-p2719-type-aware-allocation-and-deallocation-functions/83876)
  * Worth discussing, again, how we relate to implementing WG21 papers ahead of standardization to develop experience
* [\[RFC\] Supporting more early-exit loops](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-supporting-more-early-exit-loops/84690/7)
* [\[RFC\] Exclude issues from system headers as early as posible](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-exclude-issues-from-system-headers-as-early-as-posible/68483/12)
  * Seems like no input required.
* [RFC: Add Clang attribute to ensure that fields are initialized explicitly](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-add-clang-attribute-to-ensure-that-fields-are-initialized-explicitly/80626/67)

RFCs that probably don’t need our input, or are low priority:

* [RFC: adding builtin for deduplicating type lists](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-adding-builtin-for-deduplicating-type-lists/80986/22)
  * Use case is clear: Template library implementations of this algorithm require O(N^2) instantiations, leading to abysmal compile times. A builtin extension would greatly improve the situation.
  * How does this interact with WG21 and our stance on extensions in general? What’s our process for implementing the thing that we want to be standardized, under the assumption that standardization will change it, disrupting early adopters?
    * Aaron proposed having always-on diagnostics.
  * C++ standards body has identified a clear direction: deduplicate by sorting by mangled name. Next step here could be to align with that direction.
* [RFC : Support for “Pseudo” Targets in Clang-Frontend](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-support-for-pseudo-targets-in-clang-frontend/84704/11)
  * Interesting, probably worth discussing
  * Aaron: Effectively rejected
* [\[RFC\]\[LTO\] Handling math libcalls with LTO](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-lto-handling-math-libcalls-with-lto/84884)
  * May not be Clang related
* [\[RFC\] Removing default widening of OpenMP collapsed IVs](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-removing-default-widening-of-openmp-collapsed-ivs/84976)
  * First cut: fresh, OpenMP inside baseball, the community can probably handle this without our input.
* [\[RFC\] Proposal for Offload Execution Test Suite](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-proposal-for-offload-execution-test-suite/83947/15)
  * Feels more infra / project council related than clang
* [\[RFC\] An ABI lowering library for LLVM](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-an-abi-lowering-library-for-llvm/84495/17)
  * Would Clang use such a library if it existed?
  * This is long-standing issue we could burn a lot of time on, I’d prefer we defer it.
* [\[RFC\] \[ObjCDirect\] move nil check to a thunk function](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-objcdirect-move-nil-check-to-a-thunk-function/84865)
  * New ObjC direct ABI flag, still backwards compatible. Probably doesn’t need input.
* [\[RFC\] Can embedded linux toolchain find runtime library in sysroot by default?](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-can-embedded-linux-toolchain-find-runtime-library-in-sysroot-by-default/84693)

Notes

* How do we select RFCs?
  * Want to pick RFCs w
* Meeting format:
  * 1hr 2hr? 20min / RFC? 30min / RFC \+ 30min extra?
  * 1hr 20/20/20, with 5min intro, 15min discussion… seems like it will run over
  * Idea: Schedule one call for one RFC, allocate an hour, measure how long it takes, use that for future plans
  * Eli: We should be clear about the purpose of the meeting: we’re trying to suss out consensus, identify next steps, and not “decide” on the acceptance status of the proposal, or resolve disagreements
    * Avoid pressuring people, just offer a venue for synchronous communication to expedite the consensus building process
  * What do we do if we run over our time box? Suggest that the participants organize their own offline call, office hours, or other things.
  * Suggestion: two 30min slots, back to back, encourage authors to set up their own calls, working groups, etc, as needed
  * Invite process: Post to the RFC on Discourse, cc the author directly, plus appropriate maintainers and reviewers, to get availability and schedule. Propose a time as a starting point.

Action items

- [ ]

## Feb 20, 2025 | [Clang area team meeting](https://www.google.com/calendar/event?eid=MGhocnA3bWFqN2Y5MDVhb2hzYjEzYmw2bHYgcm5rQGxsdm0ub3Jn)

Attendees: [aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com) [efriedma@quicinc.com](mailto:efriedma@quicinc.com) [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@google.com) [Reid Kleckner](mailto:rnk@llvm.org)

Agenda Topics

* Logistics
  * Size of team?
  * Frequency of meetings?
  * Chartering working groups? Relationship with Clang C/C++ Language WG?
  * Picking a Chair and Secretary (should wait if we’re increasing the size of the team?)
  * Clang-specific documentation on how to interface with the area team, what the area team promises to do?
* Project policies:
  * The project is old and has lots of verbal history policies that are not written down, and not always adhered to, like “don’t use ASTMatchers in the compiler” or “don’t add new off-by-default warnings” and others. I think it would be helpful for the area team to clarify and write down existing policy. In this meeting, I would like us to identify a short list of the most important policies we can clarify.
  * Some ideas:
    *

Notes

* Goal: Facilitate decision making, identify proposal next steps
  * Time commitment: We have management support to spend time on LLVM upstream work, but this time trades off against code review and other upstream activities
  * Scope for C/C++ lang WG is focused towards standards-track work, not exactly overall project goals
* Relationship with maintainers:
  * Keeping maintainer lists up to date is our responsibility
  * We want maintainers to be the front line, rather than everything getting escalated to the area team
  * How do we fill the pipeline of RFCs?
  * Could have a Discourse post tagging mechanism
  * We can invite RFC authors to the open working group meeting
* Time of day: What’s best?
  * We can alternate to reach different time zones
  * We (current area team) are US east/west
  * Schedule the public meeting on demand, as needed
  * Use the LLVM community calendar [calendar@llvm.org](mailto:calendar@llvm.org)
  * **Decision:** Let’s use this timeslot (10am pacific, Thursday, 2w, 30minutes)
  * Reid will send the calendar invites
* Team size:
  * Minor logistical challenges
  * Additional team leads enables decision making around illness and vacation, increased lottery factor
  * Eli: adding folks to the area team may tend to grow the agenda, and more conversations will happen in the closed meeting, and we value open communication
  * Aaron: Most important thing is community trust
  * W.r.t. Project policies above, we do not sign off on them by fiat\! They go through RFCs
  * **Decision:** Comfortable with 3
  * It’s OK
* Agenda setting process:
  * Chair or secretary could fill the agenda
* Roles: Chair / secretary
  * Discussion of the role of the area team / project council
  * E.g. language extensions: You have a clear set of pro / con stakeholders for and against
  * Opportunity to write down our area team philosophy and approach
  * Reflections on the election process: Diversity in company and background is important, and is not something the election process naturally selects for.
  * Recusal is a common straightforward approach to resolving conflicts of interest
  * **Decision:** Aaron will be the area team chair
  * **Decision:** Reid will be the secretary, the secretary will populate the agenda ahead of the meeting
* Policies: What are the most important things to formalize?
  * Policies on language extensions
  * Policy on what makes a clang-tidy / static analyzer warning vs a compiler warning
    * Hard to gather data as an OSS project. Could we use the telemetry library?
    * Reid: Google does a ton of internal data analytics with stats
    * Eli: Can we search github to do warning analysis? ( / sourcegraph)
    * Reid: Data analytic dumping via the filesystem could be a way to navigate the privacy concerns
  * ASTMatcher policy is a minor point
  * Revert policy: Do we agree it should be “blameless?” If a change triggers a pre-existing bug, do we still revert? Consensus: Yes
    * What is a “defect”? Just tests pass / fail? Or, more user-focused?
  * Aaron: Current expectations are that all policies apply to all projects, however that’s not how things work in practice and is not something the community ever explicitly agreed to. He’d like to see this clarified (some policies should apply to everything in the monorepo, like the Code of Conduct; other policies are reasonable to allow the sub-community to set, like coding style guides or criteria for extensions)

Action items

- [ ] Aaron will write up draft to communicate our organizational decisions
- [x] ~~Reid will schedule recurring meetings~~

