Meeting Agenda - Jun 11, 2025

Agenda

* WG21 meeting in Sofia is happening next week (June 16-21)
  * Results of EWG session on June 5th about reflection
    * Two main topics on the paper. Asked to remove syntax for splicing mentioning any kind of template parameter. It’s problematic, the wording is hard, and we don’t have time to figure out the right answer. No features are lost as you can do everything else via substitute(). The other part was handling of using declarations. Splicing the reflection of the member is not the same as naming the member when using declarations are involved. There was a wording proposal to resolve this via “entity proxies” which are introduced by using declarations. Then you can reflect on those entities and resolves some access control issues. EWG did not proceed with that approach; reflections with using declarations are now going to be ill-formed for now. We can solve the issue later.
    * Outcome is not ideal, leaving space for a potential solution. The problem is still there, just with no solution.
    * Hubert thinks entity proxies are a more palatable solution, but likely won’t be solved for C++26.
  * Potential need for NB positions on reflection
    * Hints that Core may not get through the full review for reflection. If that happens, the paper may still be polled by another group (like EWG) and if we have any process concerns about the lack of full review it would be good to have a national body position on whether to oppose or not.
* Bounds safety syntax ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-bounds-safety-in-c-syntax-compatibility-with-gcc/85885/38)) — we need to push against forward declarations (Vlad)
  * Vlad: don’t care too much about what the C committee does, but the solution with forward declarations in parameter lists (GCC extension) is a concern.
  * These will show up in shared headers between C and C++, so this extension will have pressure to be exposed in C++ but that seems like a disaster waiting to happen.
  * I think we should push back on that feature.
  * Hubert: didn’t C come up with a new solution for this?
  * Aaron: sort of; we have a proposal which is basically GCC’s extension but without wording
  * Corentin: There was a suggested solution which allows attributes to forward declare things that can be visible to lookup, but I have concerns about how that works in practice.
  * Vlad: a lot of these solutions end up feeling a bit like templates
  * Ambrose: I saw someone suggest putting the attribute in a different location (after the parameter list, after the struct), so you know what the members are. Then there’s no special syntax.
  * Vlad: Yes, I also suggested pairing the attributes so there’s counted_by and counts so the order does not matter. The problem with putting it at the end, it doesn’t work for parameters.
  * Aaron: function type vs function declaration issues
  * Coretin: or could make __counted_by a keyword and then it can do what it wants
  * Coretin: or just require __attribute__, but not add any new extensions
  * Aaron: personally, I don’t think we need to rush a new language extension for this; we can use existing language features to solve it. Nothing is on fire.
* 64-bit source locations ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/revisiting-64-bit-source-locations/86556/26)) (Vlad)
* Delayed typo correction ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/need-a-maintainer-for-typo-correction/86360)) (Vlad)
  * Aaron posted a call for maintainers
  * Two people responded, neither were original authors of the feature
  * https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/143423
  * Regular typo correction is still there, that’s where we should direct our efforts to
  * Ambrose: nice to not have to call DelayedTypeCorrection()
* _BitInt (Hubert)
  * Hubert is not entirely sure what the intent for code generation is, especially when loading from memory or passing values. ABI stuff.
  * Was there committee intent when loading (e.g.) that the size is as tight as possible, including the junk bits if you had space left over
  * The _BitInt ABI document may not have co-evolved well
  * When Erich and Aaron were working on _ExtInt, they were told to come up with an ABI and come back with their solution. Ended up with problems with int128_t compat. Never revisited the ABI document. It’s up to the platform. We treated it as a structure with a single bitfield of the specified width. Padding bits are just junk.
  * Hubert: Some platforms have weird bit-fields. Junk bits business requires masking and shifting.
  * Aaron: Yes. I’m not sure if optimizers are smart enough to get rid of unnecessary ones
  * Hubert: I was hoping for the power-of-2 sizes.
  * Aaron: I think we ended up with powers of 2, because we have chunks.
  * Hubert: int128 is one of the cases when it gets weird.
  * Aaron: that’s why it’s the largest int in the ABI
  * Hubert: …
  * Aaron: we’re not sure what’s going on in GCC
  * Corentin: if the only documentation we have is a PR from 3 years ago, how are we going to sync implementations
  * Aaron: …
  * Corentin: it’s going to depend on the platform. Are we going to put it in Itanium ABI?
  * Aaron: this is more of psABI layer. We have multiple per platform
  * Corentin: Where would we put it usually?
  * Aaron: That’s why I put it in a public document
  * Hubert: Reference document would be nice. Primary value is knowing the pitfalls
  * Aaron: ABI folks say to come to them with solutions
  * Hubert: Yeah, but they can suggest directions, especially if Richard gets involved.
  * Aaron: Some of psABI folks work at intel, no luck
  * Hubert: I think Clang and GCC are not compatible, but not entirely sure
  * Aaron: Yeah, GCC does the masking
  * Hubert: caller-callee handshakes are not holding
  * Corentin: Microsoft do not care, but at some point someone will come to WG21 with a design, and in 3 years, they will. That paper would adopt what Clang does.
  * Aaron: our path forward is that we come up with something reasonable, they hopefully match that. If they don’t, we change to match them.
  * Hubert: do we need diagnostics?
  * Aaron: we are always catching up historically
  * Hubert: The question was more general. Our ABI is not stable for any platform
  * Hubert: Clang is the only platform that does anything on POWER.
  * Aaron: I don’t know that WG21 is going to do, but WG14…
  * Aaron: GCC will support up to 64 bits
  * Hubert: I need to check the C standard on value and object representation, trap representations, too.
  * Hubert: If we have trap representations, then we can say that junk bits are trap representations.
  * Aaron: looking if we have trap representations. Apparently, no, only for floating-point
  * Ambrose: looking at CE, GCC adds the parameter and shift by 1. On x86 it has to be sing-extended, required by ABI.
  * Aaron: didn’t know we put range information
  * Ambrose: middle-end adds it, clang doesn’t emit that
  * Hubert: Committees do not know what is done, there supposed to be a single way of doing things across platforms. Do we want to collaborate on how ABI considerations are covered? After that, we can get psABI updated
  * Aaron: sounds good. On the committee side, we don’t want implementation to lose optimisations opportunities by requiring too much. There are big use cases, we should provide good support for both.
  * Hubert: There are operations you can perform without shift if you allow junk bits.
  * Aaron: When me and Erich worked on this, we wondered whether we need to sign-extend, etc. We need to be flexible about ABI stuff, otherwise we’ll paint ourselves into a corner. ExtInt was driven by FPGA group.
  * Hubert: So we say we do not commit to what the ABI is until further feedback
  * Aaron: yes, need more feedback from backend people.
  * Hubert: I can have attention from backend people
  * Corention: on C++ side, people tried to standardize int128, but it’s a massive effort to add anything to the standard library. If we can make BitInt usable for int128, that would be very nice
  * Aaron: we recently fixed it, so that it can fulfill that
  * Aaron: one upcoming design change that people are going to be happy about is 1-bit signed bitint. Going to hold 0, -1.
  * Ariel: how endianess is handled?
  * Aaron: I think front-end is endian-agnostic. Leaving this up to LLVM
  * Ariel: DWARF?
  * Aaron: ignored. I don’t recall adding any logic to emit debuginfo. Maybe someone else did that. DWARF has a way to handle oversized bit-fields, maybe that can be used.
  * Ariel: you need to be careful. If you promote it to a power of 2, you need to know what the mask is
  * Aaron: yeah. Can’t check, because on visual studio. We should check how lldb behaves.
    * Shafik tried it out in lldb and the behavior seems to be correct (inspecting objects in the debugger gives the correct values, types all seem to be as expected)
  * Ariel: to be feature-complete, you need proper support in tools
  * Aaron: agreed. Add a note to myself
  * Ariel: mangling?
  * Aaron: we already have to answer this already. We use extension mangling.
  * Ariel: compat with other implementations?
  * Aaron: open questions
* -finput-charset (Hubert)

Meeting Agenda - Jun 04, 2025

Agenda

* -fno-cxx-exceptions and constant expressions (Corentin)
  * Should this flag disable exception handling mechanisms only at runtime or should it also impact compile time?
  * If compile time, should we add a new flag so users can disable runtime exceptions but enable compile time ones?
  * There is some confusion amongst maintainers talking about this
  * STL facilities may require constexpr exceptions, so should those work?
  * Corentin prefers the flag to just disable codegen but otherwise allow constant expression exceptions
  * Hubert: IBM upstreamed -fignore-exceptions which does kind of the same thing; disables codegen exceptions but not give you an error
  * Corentin: slightly different than the other flag in that we still want the codegen exceptions
  * Aaron: GCC documents codegen only but rejects uses, Clang rejects more aggressively. Personal preference is for no exceptions to mean no exception; introduce a separate flag
  * Ariel: what happens with intermediate frames with exceptions disabled?
  * Hubert: that works today, it does get propagated, it’s not like everything is marked noexcept
  * Matheus: could we mark the function and have the ODR checker reject?
  * Hubert/Shafik: slightly different topic than the one we’re on. This is more about the flag behavior
  * Hubert: what could drive a decision is what libc++ or other library vendors would want to do when they see the no exceptions flag is enabled
  * Corentin: yeah we should reach out to STL maintainers. But what is the point to the flag?
  * Aaron/Shafik: sometimes it’s because folks do not want the cognitive overhead, others do not want the runtime overhead
  * Matheus: what’s the story with modules and merging together different flags?
  * Aaron: slightly orthogonal topic, this is more about compile time vs runtime
  * Corentin: I volunteer to reach out to the STL maintainers to get additional feedback
  * Vlad: reflection is going to use exceptions for error reporting, so we need *some* way to enable compile time exceptions but not runtime exceptions. I’d expect there’s some way to make that work
  * Ambrose: main thing is having some way to control these separately (compile vs runtime). Whether that’s two flags or some = sign, it doesn’t matter. We just need a way to disable them only at runtime.
  * Aaron: yeah, but we still have to figure out what the default behavior is.
  * Hubert: we have -fignore-exceptions but that’s more clear that it only impacts codegen. But it may not help. If we think `-fno-cxx-exceptions` will disable both, then there’s no way to actually only disable runtime. Disable-only runtime might be an optional warning/error that you opt into.
  * Room seems to be in favor some way to handle both compile and runtime control
  * Aaron: other dialect flags make keywords available as an identifier, -fno-cxx-exceptions retains keywords, which is odd.
  * Ambrose: diagnostics might be hard if we fail to recognize keywords
  * Aaron: yes, but that’s what you asked for. We do have an error recovery that can recognize identifiers as keywords from other language modes
  * Ambrose: does -fno-rtti disable dynamic_cast?
  * Aaron: no, because dynamic_cast is still usable
  * Hubert: GCC has this feature, and it works as you described. We don’t need to change our behavior
  * Aaron: GCC spells it differently (-fno-exceptions without the “cxx” part). We diagnose keywords at parse time, GCC does it later
  * Hubert: that gives us a perverse solution for std::meta case (e.g., __extension__)
  * Matheus: how about MS extension __try?
  * Aaron: we do support them
  * Corentin: GCC supports exceptions in unevaluated contexts. I want us to continue recognizing keywords, because that improves diagnostics and prevent them from writing code incompatible with the standard
  * Shafik: depends on viewpoint
* C++23 constexpr math implementation strategy (Tue)
  * https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-make-clang-builtin-math-functions-constexpr-with-llvm-libc-to-support-c-23-constexpr-math-functions/86450/2
  * Plan is to add all the extra function to APFloat, then get pulled directly into llvm-libc code (header only). Next step is to update the Clang builtin math functions to call into APFloat, that allows constexpr (both old and new) use it. Then libc++ can call the builtins in Clang.
  * This will add a dependency on LLVM from libc, which may be a difficulty for some downstreams. Currently guarded in the RFC via flags to manually enable or disable that. Makes the build a bit more complicated.
  * Corentin: we already have a dependency between libc and libc++; this just adds a new one. But I don’t think we need an option to control that dependency
  * Hubert: perhaps we shouldn’t have an option to disable that dependency, but it is also very unfriendly to folks because the build system configurations can have advanced things like filters to detect whether changes require a rebuild. I am surprised to hear there’s a libcxx dependency on libc. This new dependency should not be sprung on people as a surprise. It may not be overly unfriendly, but my prefer would be to say that builds should not work until you turn on a CMake variable which acknowledges that the dependencies exist.
  * Corentin: I would assume the dependency would rebuild everything automatically. So a change to libc should cause Clang to rebuild.
  * Hubert: if you are using git to check if there’s a reason to do a build and your tooling says no.
  * Corentin: can that be solved with documentation?
  * Hubert: documentation could work; release notes at the very least. That helps folks between releases, but folks tracking main may have some surprises (but unlikely to be the end of the world)
  * Vlad: changes to CMake files will trigger reconfiguration of CMake even for people who already have their builds. I think it’s possible to write a check that gets you what you need.
  * Vlad: dependencies between projects makes standalone builds unhappy, but that’s not well-supported upstream
  * Corentin: if it’s a source of confusion, maybe we want a library that’s common to libc, libc++, etc. Then the common subset lives somewhere else and there’s less surprising dependencies
  * Tue: putting it somewhere else makes it more complicated overall. That’s a bigger dependency graph. Tricky ones are folks who only grab the llvm folder instead of cloning the whole repo. But they should be able to update their build scripts. Separate project makes testing more problematic due to duplicated tests across projects. libc++abi is an example; they want to merge that back into libc++
  * Hubert: I still think it’s helpful to have the separate folder because the users in those situations are more likely to say they don’t want all of libc, so now they can get just the parts that are needed but not all of libc.
  * Tue: splitting them into two will eventually result in drift which is harder to maintain
  * Hubert: I think the extra folder will force you to either have tests that are complete within that folder, or you’re forced to go and create tests for all of libc, libc++, and clang and consider all three at the same time. Having it only within libc makes it easier to have a libc-centered focus.
  * Aaron: please be sure to leave your concerns directly on the RFC so the rest of the community knows about the perspective.
  * Ariel: this is mostly about packaging. But I’m wondering about things like hex float. How are we going to accommodate either IEEE or other representations of standard types?
  * Tue: plan for the math library is that we’ll support all the floating-point formats that APFloat supports (cross-platform), so that’s IEEE as well as other representations.
  * Ariel: do you propose to implement all the standard functions for IBM hex float?
  * Tue: if there’s a spec for it and a request, then yes
  * Hubert: I’m a bit confused. On a platform with hex float, you have the IBM z systems, you would have hardware support for these (e.g., addition), but you won’t have that available on another platform. Is this support for libc going to have code where building llvm-libc natively it works, or are we saying llvm-libc has these functions which are not tied to a concrete type but somehow takes a representation with the correct calling conventions?
  * Tue: inside llvm-libc we export two symbols (one C standard, one is the C++ namespaced symbol). With the C++ namespaced symbols, we can support the types however we want). If you want to cross-compile x64 80-bit float on ARM. We will detect it’s not available on the hardware, we will do the emulation.
  * Hubert: the type needs to be available in some representation for you, which is kind of the problem. If you’re building the compiler on x86, there’s no compiler that has a hex float type on x86 for you to do the compilation in.
  * Tue: enabling the types on multiple platforms is a bit of a chicken and egg problem.
  * Hubert: stepping back and looking at the big picture. In order to be a cross-compiler, it seems we’re increasing our requirements for the build system as well as Clang and LLVM; you lose some host compilers with this path.
  * Ariel: I have concerns about the mangling issue. If you’re using mangling to disambiguate between different representations because hex float and IEEE float are mangled the same way. We’re looking at the C types, not the representations.
  * Tue: for this proposal, the name mangling and compiler support matters. Everything is about propagating the correct bit patterns. With that, LLVM and Clang can hook directly into the implementation.
  * Ariel: you are going to need to have operations to do the basic arithmetic; you can’t rely on the hardware for that.
  * Tue: we have that, yes
  * Ariel: did you consider folding everything into APFloat instead of a library?
  * Tue: it’s all being folded into APFloat but the source lives in libc.
  * Ariel: so when I look at your PR, you’re going to check the semantics and if it’s not IEEE, you’ll dispatch to a different function?
  * Tue: Yes
  * Hubert: when you’re saying it calls into libc; you’re saying libc has interfaces for abstract floating-point types?
  * Tue: Yes
  * Hubert: sounds good. You mentioned IBM double double. That type has very interesting properties. You can’t just use a 128-bit type to figure out its operations because it has variable precision.
  * Tue: Yes, we do have some internal implementation for double double.
  * Ariel: using the exp function as an example. If it’s IEEE, you call the libc function or whatever. If it’s double double or hex float, or something you don’t know, what do you do then in a constant expression?
  * Tue: reject the constant expression
  * Ariel: anything we do needs to be bit-for-bit compatible with what we get at runtime.
  * Hubert: that’s not the goal; the goal is to get an accurate, correctly rounded result. That may not be bit-for-bit compatible with your system’s behavior.
  * Ariel: other considerations would mandate that it behaves the same way as runtime.
  * Aaron: there are standards requirements of varying kinds attempting to get them the same between constexpr and runtime, but it’s not possible to accomplish in a cross compiler.
* 20.1.7 is [delayed](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/llvm-20-x-release-schedule-update/86688) by 2 days, and is planned to be the last 20.x release (Vlad)
  * 21 branch cut-off might come [earlier than usual](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-updating-and-aligning-the-llvm-release-process-before-llvm-21/86493/27)
* Bounds safety syntax ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-bounds-safety-in-c-syntax-compatibility-with-gcc/85885/38)) — we need to push against forward declarations (Vlad)
* 64-bit source locations ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/revisiting-64-bit-source-locations/86556/26)) (Vlad)
* Delayed typo correction ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/need-a-maintainer-for-typo-correction/86360)) (Vlad)
* EWG session on Thursday June 5th on reflection changes ([P3687](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2025/p3687r0.html)) (Vlad)
  * Details on [EWG reflector](http://lists.isocpp.org/ext/2025/05/25829.php)
* WG21 meeting in Sofia is happening in 2 weeks (June 16-21)
  * Moving our next meeting to the 11th so we don’t conflict
* _BitInt (Hubert)
  * SG22 meets today, details in WG21 [Mattermost](https://chat.isocpp.org/landing#/general/pl/bpnbndcb63y9meqdf1xm6jwzko)
* -finput-charset (Hubert)

Meeting Agenda - May 21, 2025

Agenda

* Open Source Summit North America
  * Reid is going, talking about decision-making, policy, etc
* Rust Week
  * Happened last week in Utrecht (Netherlands), Aaron participated remotely due to a request for Clang representation on the topic of C++ <-> Rust interop
  * It seems like ~all the tooling around interop is Clang-based, which is nice to see
  * No direct request of Clang, but may get requests for improvements to libclang, plugins, or other things that help out-of-tree code generators. May have more direct requests of LLVM, could end up having some new Clang builtins maybe, but picture unclear
  * A lot of interest in getting interop to work, not much hope the committees will solve safety, security, or Rust interop.
  * Shafik: How much work will it take to get to 100% C++ support?
Aaron: No timeline, but as soon as possible. Have understanding of low-level stuff, e.g. details of exception handling
  * Hubert: Does interop look like FFI, or more something like extern “rust”?
Aaron: bidirectional, FFI-like.
  * Hubert: We’ve been having issues with C <--> Rust interop, because Rust frontend has assumptions about layout.
  * Companies don’t believe WG21 will address safety and security concerns, so they are trying to move to Rust, but they want to do that piecemeal, because of existing C and C++ codebases.
  * Corentin: Is there an expectation Rust will support C++ mangling?
Aaron: Maybe COM-style interop, not sure it was discussed.
  * Aaron missed half of each day due to time zone differences
  * JF did a presentation about submitting papers to WG21
* Reflection Progress in CWG
  * CWG going through the last parts of library wording; still have questions about access context (relatively new in reflection), especially with using declarations that change access in class. Also had questions about value reflections; what is a class value? It’s kind of resolved as far as CWG is concerned, because EWG needs to see stuff about all of this.
  * At least one paper on EWG’s plate for Sofia
  * Our community concerns regarding defining new types during constant expression evaluation has not yet made it to the Core wording review; that’s coming
  * Shafik: surprised by how many issues we’ve run into; solved a lot of them, but feel like we’re going to end up with a lot of DRs against reflection. He’s concerned how much burden that adds to implementations, especially around corner cases. Feels rushed.
  * Hubert thinks there’s reason to be optimistic because users only hit this when they add new code.
  * Shafik: but that depends on users finding the issues and they may inadvertently start relying on those corner cases, making it harder for us to fix issues as implementers.
  * Hubert: definitely finding surprising corner cases with reflection; this is all new stuff, but it’s also all last-minute design changes.
  * Hubert: we do not have a reference implementation aside from the Clang one. The EDG one has fallen far behind and crashes a lot. The Clang one implements some behavior, but it’s not necessarily the behavior from the wording. There are also subtleties with existing wording and interacting with reflection. Also, it seems that the Clang experiment has at least three different modes of reflection. This is all reason to believe we don’t have two independent implementations based on the wording.
  * Shafik, Vlad, Aaron: I really appreciate all the effort you’ve put into this Hubert.
  * Vlad: Core sometimes discovers things and the authors don’t always agree on what the intent is, which is a concern. As to Shafik’s concerns with DRs, he doesn’t think more papers will help that situation; he supports an experimental flag until the design is settled in practice.

Round Table

* Aaron
  * Cleaning up C++ compat diagnostics
  * Triaging issues, special attention to crashes
    * Delayed typo correction is a major source of instability. 60 issues
    * Exploring a patch to disable delayed typo correction by default. It’s not maintained. It’s quite a lot of code in frontend, all C++ related (templates).
    * Matheus: Are we sure those crashes really caused by delayed typo correction, or just being uncovered by it?
Aaron: Delayed typo correction has a lot of invariants that need to be upheld. Because we codegen decl by decl, delayed typo correction throws a wrench in there, because invalid code can get to codegen.
    * Corentin: Aaron created [a PR](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/140571) that disables codegen if an error was encountered. Wonder how many tests break.
    * Ariel: Question about invariants. Are they being violated?
Aaron: Unmaintained, no one to know the answer. It was implemented around 6 years ago, but then the person vanished from the community.
Reid: Talking internally to Ilya about removing delayed typo correction. Ilya’s response: “best Christmas gift”. We should be removing unmaintained stuff from previous generation of maintainers.
Reid: Invariants are alike to manual track of memory allocations.
    * Corentin: Do we understand the impact of removing of delayed type corrections on the quality of diagnostics?
Aaron: This is not removing any diagnostics. Drops some “did you mean?” notes. The difference might be “diagnostics issued” and “diagnostics issued and compiler then crashes.”
Reid: We have one flag for typo correction. Are you making the distinction between regular type correction and delayed one?
Reid: There are implications for error recovery. Sometimes we correct to the wrong thing.
Aaron: There are people who disable typo correction entirely, because it’s wrong often enough
Matheus: Doing stuff in AST, typo corrections is a major source of pain.
  * Ambrose
    * Mostly doing code reviews, also working diagnostic formatting
    * Aaron needs to learn how to spot DMs in Discord
  * Ariel
    * Mostly working on DWARF stuff, getting ranges to work correctly for zOS
  * Corentin
    * Improving diagnostics for trivial relocations; making static_assert on type traits more useful because they can explain why a given type does not match the trait
    * Thinking about how to help users to include the correct standard library header when they forget to include one; don’t have time to work on it currently, so anyone interested in helping should get in touch
    * System headers + deprecation diagnostics + user-defined types do not work as well as they could
  * Hubert
    * Communicating with the committee on the atomic reduction proposal and how it impacts the Power ISA
    * Text encoding facilities was merged, but there are post-commit review comments.
    * Still need to look at the exec charset PR. In C, sometimes “character” means “byte”, like with the printf format string. Moving between multibyte and single byte interpretations. So there’s a mess here.
    * Corentin: there are places where we evaluate a string and put it into a diagnostic, but that requires a two-way conversion. You can convert from the literal encoding to UTF-8, and then UTF-8 to whatever the terminal needs
    * Hubert: yes, there can be conversion errors and so we need a fallback to help recover. Not surprised there will be a lot to do.
    * Input charset work is not yet started, but will be coming someday. We might go for something rather direct (try to look at the file management facilities and do a one-shot conversion on the buffer). If we encounter any encoding errors, we could report the byte offset within the file to the user. Corentin really likes that approach, thinks it’s how GCC handles it too.
    * Hubert: some interesting cases, like how does -D work in terms of what character set it is. UTF-8 from the command line? File names would get converted, etc. We’ll look into those.
    * We spoke last meeting about a defect with linkage problems and thread_local. Aaron will poke Nikita about this
  * Tue
    * Posted RFC for constexpr math (https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-make-clang-builtin-math-functions-constexpr-with-llvm-libc-to-support-c-23-constexpr-math-functions/86450), would like help
    * Hubert: some concerns about target vs host floating-point differences

Meeting Agenda - May 07, 2025

Agenda

* [Parser refactoring](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/parser-h-reorganization-pr/86178)
  * https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/138511
  * Mostly moving APIs around, similar to how we did for Sema. Also did a lot of clang-formatting, but not of comments. Moved grammar comments from .cpp file to .h file.
  * Aaron: want to make sure we give downstreams enough time to react if there are issues
  * Corentin: can we fix the formatting stuff before we land? We don’t want to land big changes and then land another set of big changes later; too much churn.
  * Vlad: there are not as many non-formatted parts, 10:1 overly long grammar vs the rest of the comments. I have no idea how to get clang-format to handle the way we do grammar citations. Especially around the comments that include the language mode as part of the citation.
  * Ambrose: the fix could be for clang-format to recognize the /verbatim block
  * Erich: clang-format off comments could also work
  * Ambrose: it would still be nice a clang-format choice because of how often those are used
  * Erich: that doesn’t fix old clang-format issues; folks tend to use whatever is on their system as opposed to whatever is in their trunk. I think we need to do something to handle older clang-format
  * Ambrose: isn’t this always a problem?
  * Erich: it is, but CI often catches it by giving a different answer. The problem is when it’s a silent difference; if the old one makes the change and the new one says “that’s fine because it’s in a verbatim bock”, that would be dangerous.
  * Aaron: clang-format comments are annoyingly distracting, we try to avoid them
  * Erich: agreed, not a perfect solution
  * Corentin: it could be a configuration option for clang-format; even if it’s just for Clang, maybe it’s worth it?
  * Ambrose: review should catch mangling the comments because it should be fairly obvious
  * Erich: ideally, yes, but we miss that sort of thing
  * Aaron: it sounds like the room is okay with this direction, status quo of manual formatting but the patch improves formatting elsewhere.
  * Room: silent agreement
  * Erich/Aaron: shockingly few concerns with the changes to Sema.h that happened a while back, this is a smaller set of changes.
  * Hubert: it’s not the problem of what happens upstream on a friday, it’s what happens to downstreams on Friday when nobody is working over the weekend.
  * Erich: it’s often not mattered in the past, first thing Monday vs weekend
  * Hubert/Ariel: it matters a lot if they pile up
  * Erich: don’t want the person on Monday morning to be overwhelmed
  * Room (except Erich, who hates the people who have to deal with merge conflicts and wants them to feel pain): land changes on Monday rather than Friday

Round Table

* Aaron
  * -Wc++-compat, adding a lot of new functionality to it and fixing up problems

* Ambrose
  * Not much to report, busy last week
  * Fixed problems with compatibility warnings; some of the groups were wrong in places
  * Will look into the clang-format on/off comments and see if the clang-format folks are okay with changes
  * Core reviews
* Ariel
  * Primarily working on DWARF stuff
* Corentin
  * Landed the C++26 trivial relocation PR, will have follow-up work to do.
  * Expects to start seeing work done on upstreaming C++ contracts, unclear how the process will work but it should start soon
  * Bug fixes and concept satisfaction checking
* Erich
  * Not much to report
* Fahad
  * Not much to report, working more on swift interop than C or C++
  * May be able to help comment on Clang’s release notes and test cases for C and C++ standards feature
* Hubert
  * -Wformat patch, might not be able to look at the code, but the status quo with immediately escalating functions means we cannot avoid false positives or false negatives now. Continuing further in that direction makes things worse.
  * Looked into a TLS issue that Aaron pinged on last month; don’t know the LLVM IR well enough to know if the dso_local is correct or not.
  * Still intending to get back to the encoding facilities review; it seems close to ready. The issues I pointed out have been fixed. Just need to see if there’s more issues now.
  * Committee work for WG21
* Mariya
  * Worked on MS vector deleting destructors; had to revert everything. Worked on fixes for it, there will be follow-up patches
* Tony

* Vlad
  * Worked on Parser refactoring
  * Converting unscoped enums to scoped enums, in preparation for future parser refactoring work
  * Reviewing python libclang binding patches

Meeting Agenda - Apr 16, 2025

Agenda

* [-Wreturn-type RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-make-wreturn-type-an-error-by-default/85775)
  * Need a fixit
  * -fhardened (but in GCC it doesn’t control diagnostics, only codegen)
  * Run an experiment on a distribution to see what the fallout is, then consider inflicting it on downstreams for wider fallout
  * Hardened mode is basically flipping the default from “can’t prove this is unsafe, so silence the diagnostic” to “can’t prove this is safe, so emit the diagnostic”
* Project Council updates
  * Meeting minutes: [Project Council Meetings](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tb0vAH-ONYtX_DrpC7rr5fFrbqzm6XY3iPCWgDYYQ4U/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.qgoz7tlffqww)
  * Track RFC project council have opinions on via GitHub Issues
  * Set up an alias on GitHub to summon project council via @
  * Area teams meetings are like Clang WG
  * Does the foundation have a member on the council?
    * No, there will be a liaison relationship, but it’s still in flux
* WG21 setting up a chat channel for committee members to be able to discuss implementation issues within the committee
  * Does Clang want to participate?
  * Aaron, Tom, and Shafik have talked about it internally, but our primary concern is that the committee tends to ignore feedback opposed to their idea. We tend to get burned by helping the committee out, so there needs to be better understanding on the committee of what “implementable” actually means.
  * Aaron: answering questions is fine, but discussions day in, day out are too much, and doesn’t seem to help in the long run. We can answer about implementation details, but we can’t answer for the whole Clang community.
  * Corentin: better to send people to Discord, more people available to help answer anyway
  * Vlad: we could help point out some resources like compile time tracker to help them get good QoI without having to hold hands. They are likely to want to know how changes impact the ecosystem as a whole but we have no tools to help with that (we wish we did). But our time is pretty limited.
  * Ambrose: yeah, this is what #clang is for on Discord. But agreed it would be helpful to get better testing on large corpuses.
  * Hubert: not everyone is on Discord, some folks can’t attend due to ToS.
  * Aaron: we should send folks to any of the community resources already available.
  * Corentin: we should write a paper about “implementation experience” and send to the committees. Aaron, are you still trying to write that paper?
  * Aaron: not actively working on it, too worried about it not helping in the committee. Maybe it would be better to update the getting started/getting involved pages? Our current documentation is out-of-date
  * Vlad: a paper is something the committee will argue over the details of; updating our documentation sets expectations from our community

Round Table

* Vlad
  * Sitting in Core, discussing reflection and pattern matching
  * Not too much else happening
* Tony
  * Still working on underspecified declarations
  * Mostly needs documentation work, not implementation work; Aaron will help
  * Working on fixing an issue with the cleanup attribute
* Sohail
  * Just listening in
* Shafik
  * Still triaging issues, tracking down regressions
  * Big internal push to use static analysis on the open source project, so working on triage/fixes for those when it makes sense
  * Back onto the UB Annex for WG21
  * Trying to spend more time on code reviews
* Hubert
  * Looked at the [new PR](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/135864) for -Wformat with computed strings, opened a new related issue (a bit niche, but may still surprise users)
  * Active on the character encoding facilities review, it’s moving along
  * Found a committee wording bug determining namespace with inline namespaces, no issue opened yet, but reported under https://github.com/cplusplus/CWG/issues/698
  * Doing some compiler-rt and LLVM Object library/tools reviews for platform-specific work
* Corentin
  * Likely merging [the TAD review](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/133426) in the next few days, should align us with GCC, but there’s a high possibility of needing a revert due to lack of testing.
  * Improving conformance with concept constraint normalization, will likely be a fairly significant change
  * Usual code reviews and issues work
  * Trivial relocation is basically ready to land but still has some follow-up work that’s known to be needed. It’s not merged currently because of non-technical reasons.
* Ariel
  * Mainly working downstream, small amount on hex float
* Ambrose
  * Working on refactoring compatibility diagnostics, simplifying writing and using them.
  * Talking with Hana D about constexpr exception handling, seems to be moving towards upstreaming the changes. There is an implementation available on [Compiler Explorer](https://godbolt.org/z/Y56Mxh811). Hubert has test cases that caused problems with a previous iteration of the implementation, will try them again.
  * Code reviews
* Aaron
  * Writing code (!)
  * Going over clang:to-be-triaged issues
  * C23 work: paper about redefining types (N3037), mostly done.
  * [Previous _Countof work](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/133125)
    * Ariel: one of _Countof tests is too tied to x86
    * Aaron: Codegen tests are awkward, unfortunately. Sizes and alignments are baked in. Using update_cc_tests lately.
    * Hubert: Why do we need a codegen test?
    * Aaron: There was a codegen change. It’s testing all the ways to count an array, and some of them are runtime. More of a smoke test. To Ariel’s question: have been hairy on using update_cc_test. Would be a good idea to update it to use regex
    * Ariel: You need to check the output of the script
    * Aaron: Yes, but hard for people who are not as familiar with LLVM IR
    * Ariel: What you’ve done is check against one particular triple
    * Aaron: This is a smoke test, should be fine. Hard to check on every platform, because pre-commit CI is only Linux and Windows
    * Hubert: More explanations in comments, please
    * Aaron: I’ll go over tests and try to generalize them, or leave a comment why triple is fine

Meeting Agenda - Apr 02, 2025

Agenda

* Splitting meeting notes
  * Aaron removed all notes from before Mar 2025 from this document
  * Mar 2022 - Mar 2023: https://discourse.llvm.org/t/historical-clang-language-wg-meeting-minutes-mar-2022-mar-2023/85636
  * Apr 2023 - Mar 2024: https://discourse.llvm.org/t/historical-clang-language-wg-meeting-minutes-apr-2023-mar-2024/85637
  * Apr 2024 - Mar 2025: https://discourse.llvm.org/t/historical-clang-language-wg-meeting-minutes-apr-2024-mar-2025/85638
  * Maybe someday we’ll want to collect these into their own subcategory under Clang
* Aiming to have initial Project Council meeting tomorrow
* https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/134049 – how should we handle this?
  * Possible approaches: ignore the issue, diagnose use of $_<number> in a structure identifier, ABI break and change our lambda naming scheme, make -fdolloars-in-identifiers opt-in, something else?
  * Erich can’t make it today due to conflict but feels strongly we should diagnose any structure name that could match a generated lambda name, including if we break ABI and use reserved identifiers for the lambdas.
  * Hubert: it’s not an ABI break to change the lambda naming scheme because those names don’t show up in the mangling (at least in Itanium ABI). So we can change the naming convention without issue, hopefully
  * Aaron: Should we disable dollar signs by default?
  * Corentin: I would like to do that, independent of the lambda situation
  * Ariel: is this a security vulnerability?
  * Hubert: everything that’s named this way has internal linkage so it should not be a security vulnerability in terms of linkage
  * Aaron: sounds like we have agreement to rename lambda naming scheme
  * Hubert: the structure name used by Itanium isn’t reserved either!
  * Aaron: we should file that issue with Itanium
  * Ambrose: could name __$_<stuff> and then diagnose *anything* which starts with __$ in the name.
  * Aaron: sounds like there’s sentiment to either disable dollar sign identifier by default or at the very least start warning on their use by default
  * Hubert: the normal type name has the length prefixed, the lambda does not have the length prefix, so it doesn’t collide in that way. We can just use the Itanium ABI mangling instead of trying to come up with something else.
  * Corentin: why two different manglings?
  * Hubert: Itanium came later, we never went back and updated.
* https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/132939
  * What do we want to do about attributes?
  * Vlad: I wonder what users will do when they write plugins and how they get handled
  * James: my concern is that there’s two different cases. Are these two different types compatible? For that part of this problem, we should not make things spuriously incompatible. The hard part is when they’re the same type (same scope == same type, only one definition). So it’s not about separate types and compatibility, it’s about trying to see if we’ve defined the same type or not. We could define compatibility the way the standard says (check types, check names, check field order, bit-widths) but we don’t necessarily have to check everything. The standard doesn’t say what to do; should the end result have merged attributes (as happens with redeclarations, but then are fields redeclarations as well or are those new fields in a redeclaration of the struct?).
  * Hubert: mostly agree with James. For different scopes, it’s the user’s responsibility. For the same scope case, are you leaning towards compatibility-based or the very strict approach?
  * James: at a minimum we check compatibility. But since we don’t know what the behavior is for attribute, we should just say we’ve not implemented this right now and give up? I think when scopes are different, we should not be testing attributes at all. We should only test attributes when the scopes are the same (so it’s a redefinition case as opposed to a compatibility case).
  * Corentin: there is a design issue in the standard, it’s not reasonable that redeclarations get completely different behaviors than if you redefine the same thing. Redeclarations merge attributes. When you redefine a struct, it would not make sense to not merge attributes as well. C++ has the same issue with modules.
  * Erich: we have too many attributes which only can be put on declarations not on a definition, so merging definitions is a problem for some attributes. We’d need to audit the attributes and handle the case where there is a redefinition.
  * James: yeah, we don’t want to do that. We already handle definition followed by declaration, we should make definition after a definition handled the same way.
  * Erich: I’m saying that any attempt to add an attribute after a definition should be an error
  * James: do we need new infrastructure for this?
  * Erich: we do. Current infrastructure only ever adds attributes to successive redeclarations. Doing it in a redefinition has the “we’ve already defined it so we need to make sure it matches” which we don’t have any machinery for.
  * Ariel: what does “redefinition” mean.
  * Aaron: C23 6.2.7 defines it
  * Hubert: for the different scope case, we’re only checking for compatibility when we use one type when the other type is needed, right?
  * Aaron/James: yes
  * Hubert: which definition of compatibility are we going with? The standard one, augmented with actual layout compatibility
  * Aaron: James’ definition
  * James: my suggestion is to check only the resulting layout rather than looking at the attributes. That should get us most of the ones that matter without having to look at individual attributes.

Round Table

Meeting Agenda - Mar 19, 2025

Agenda

* Area Teams starting up
  * Clang, MLIR, and infrastructure have all started to meet.
    * Teams are starting to have meetings
    * Project council is not running yet, but will soon
    * Meeting will be on community calendar
    * Not a set day and time, depending on availability of people
  * LLVM & Project Council are still not running yet, but are expecting to start up soon
  * Keep eyes peeled on RFCs; we’ll announce in a comment in the RFC if an area team meeting is being held to discuss the topic further
* Backporting for 20.x is open now
  * Keep in mind that the ABI is frozen, so any change which impacts Clang ABI is likely a bad candidate for backporting
    * Adding a new diagnostics is an ABI break, because of a new enumerator
* https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/109576
  * Have ~5 related issues all in the same area
  * Maybe disable /EHa so users don’t hit this?
* https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/131913
  * Precommit CI has slowed down recently
  * Lucile has not yet weighed in on why the slowdown is happening
  * This risks losing test coverage, such as modules testing
  * Not too long ago we had to disable lldb testing in Clang precommit CI for performance reasons, so removing even more test coverage is worrying
  * C++26 + modules may be the most important configuration to keep, if we have to drop anything
  * Could be an issue with clang’s performance rather than CI machine performance (Aaron has seen some issues with template instantiation depths in Debug modes on Windows recently). Could be death by a thousand cuts
  * Reid: need to make tradeoffs between configurations that are the most important to the community, limited resource availability. Performance testing is especially expensive, and we currently run precommit CI on every change to a PR.
  * This might be an infrastructure team problem. What input do we want to give them for how to resolve this?
  * Aaron: long-term graph of compile time performance of Clang is horrible
  * Vlad will attend the infra meeting this week and bring the topic up there.
* Triaging crash issues have shown a number of regressions
  * Could use help on issues with the needs-reduction label
  * So far not missing any critical regressions, at least as far as we can tell.
  * A lot of the regressions are against 17-18
* Nullability attribute work needs some extra information in the AST regarding sugared template substitution nodes. But adding a flag would block the work we’re doing on resguaring. Fixing this may induce performance regressions. May not be possible to resugar template aliases perfectly (but may work sufficiently for their needs). Matheus will try to add substitution nodes back (and get rid of the driver flag). Could have flags that are usable for Clang tooling (clang-tidy) but not exposed to users.
* Hubert is wondering if we can split off the meeting minutes for the language working group because it’s 100+ pages right now
  * Aaron: sure, I’ll do that for next time
  * Aaron: will investigate putting the old notes into a git repo or dumping into a Discourse post (or could live in a folder under clang/docs)

Round Table

* Vlad
  * Working on reducing crashes in the issue list
  * CWG1 on default arguments (https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/124844) but is generating discussion in Core.
  * Fixing up the DR status page generating script
* Tony
  * Continuing to work on N30 06 on underspecified declarations
  * Testing the current approach to see how viable it is, but more work to be done
  * Planning to work on https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/129631 as well
* Tom
  * Hoping to put up some SYCL PRs this week
* Shafik
  * Working on untriaged issues, got through a bunch of them. Found a lot of good bugs
  * Working on static analysis-found issues
  * Trying to bisect regressions to figure out the responsible commits
  * Not able to work on DFP currently; on hold until internal work is finished
    * Tue thinks it might be a good GSoC project if we have something up and sort of working by next year
    * If anyone wants to pick up DFP work, that would be a good thing (not made significant progress in the past two years), will collaborate as needed.
* Reid
  * Helping a bit on vector deleting destructor work
* Matheus
  * Starting to work on resugaring again, picking up previous patches from Phab. Will make another post on Discourse as it gets closer to complete. Has a fork up on Compiler Explorer (clang resugar) if anyone wants to play with it.
* Mariya
  * Vector deleting destructor patch was reverted for two issues, working on fixing those.
    * First issue should be fixed
    * Second issue is a runtime issue, only reproducible on 32-bit systems and only with lld. Harder to pin down the fix for this one.
* Hubert
  * Hoped to get to character set conversion utilities, but got pulled off on compiler-rt work (https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/74516)
    * Corentin will help look at it
  * -finput-charset support is getting some user requests (not just exec charset)
  * Target features for PowerPC are not necessarily consistent with what flang and rust would do. Looking to set up something in LLVM a way to understand what target features are set for which CPU names; have Clang rely more on that instead of parallel implementations. Initially for PPC, other targets can opt in if needed.

Meeting Agenda - Mar 05, 2025

Agenda

* How is the Clang 20 release going?
  * Scheduled release date is Mar 11 (next Tue)
  * If anything you think is a blocker, get it landed ASAP!
  * Nevermind, release went out today: https://discourse.llvm.org/t/20-1-0-has-been-tagged/84973
  * https://discourse.llvm.org/t/20-1-0-release-update-releasing-1-week-early-tomorrow/84932/4
* How did WG14 go?
  * Met in Graz, Austria
  * Saw about 65 papers aiming for C2y, accepted/encouraged more work on all but three
  * Implementers are getting a bit frustrated at taking all features
  * May be switching from weak consensus model to strong consensus model
  * Nothing accepted at the meeting for C2y that is a major issue for Clang
  * Helpful to have more downstream implementers in the room (currently represented are Intel, Apple, and IBM; could use folks from Google and Microsoft, could use folks from llvm-libc for library coverage, could use folks from LLVM for backend perspective)
  * Erich has some Microphone to USB interfaces that could be used to help with audio issues. Would still need to get the microphones themselves.
  * Pittsburgh in sept is the next scheduled meeting, may move to virtual meeting though
  * Corentin: what is the value of having a TS for defer? It’s a small feature. We don’t have good success with TSes in general.
  * Aaron: it’s small enough, want to have it documented as “fully experimental” so we can change as the standard changes. I hope to implement this TS.
  * Erich: lots of overhead to having TSes which reduces the value. Whitepaper is a slightly less heavy option; basically a TS but without ISO process behind it.
  * Hubert: don’t care for the editorial aspect of TS, but may lose the balloting aspect of it as well, which is a loss.
  * Erich: could ask the convener to do unofficial ballots for getting NB-ballot-like voting
* Flowing off the end of a function, should that be an error?
  * WG21 CWG having a discussion about this topic, wondering where people lie on it
  * Some folks think optimizations are too aggressive here in terms of not running destructors.
  * Should it be ill-formed or should Core do a more nuanced approach?
  * Aaron: CFG means we have a lot of false positives, so making it ill-formed is likely to break a lot of code.
  * Ambrose: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/111509#issuecomment-2615931312
  * Reid: this also presupposes compilers can support all of the various “unreachable” idioms that are used in practice. Inline assembly, volatile nullptr dereference, etc.
  * Reid: isn’t CFG optional?
  * Aaron: It should be, but it isn’t (-Wall/-Wextra enables some diagnostics)
  * Reid: still perhaps a good reason to push back on standards-based requirements for CFG
  * Aaron: agreed, it negatively impacts compile times and it has heuristic-based diagnostic which means it’s got false positives
  * Corentin: I have the opposite reaction; falling off the end of a function is a massive security/safety concern. We should make it an error. Fixing it is easy by putting in unreachable(). That said, the standard is going to struggle to specify static analysis, so it may not be a standards mandated thing. MSVC does make it an error by default and has always done that. Portable code should already address this.
  * Joshua: can alleviate a lot of the problems by adding a return value instead of diagnosing as a difficult case. The optimizer can handle removing that. So the security concern may not be worth the problem
  * Aaron: conditional code makes it harder (assert()), but still want to get this as a matter of QoI. Standardization seems hard though.
  * Reid: -Werror=return-type, effectively?
  * Aaron: that’s what we’re trying as QoI, yes
  * Shafik: Java got this right, if you can’t prove it returns, then it’s an error.
  * Hubert: I think false positives will get a bad reaction, but we can see; it’s not the first time we’ve enabled warnings as errors that become things people turn off across the board. In terms of committee, we have nothing we can propose to the committee. Clarifications they’re going through are reasonable.
  * Tom: agreed with what Hubert was saying, as long as we’re running destructors, that’s good. Do we emit a ud2?
  * Shafik/Ambrose: I think we do.
  * Ambrose: according to CE, you get a ret instruction and that’s it, irrespective of optimization level
  * Joshua: depends on flags
  * Reid: tangled mess of conditionals within LLVM; I wish we could commit to a trap.
  * Tom: regarding warning as an error, if we can do that with a low false positive rate, that’s awesome. Does GCC do that as well?
  * Shafik: not currently
  * Aaron: has anyone reached out and asked?
  * Ambrose: warning is on by default, but not as an error
  * Hubert: CE LLVM IR for a function that flows off, we do have an unreachable there. Adding an automatic variable that needs destruction, the destruction doesn’t happen. Adding a return statement causes the destruction to happen. Clang needs to do work to implement it.
  * Shafik: the UB is that we’re not returning a value (unconditionally, in C++). Not the same in C.
  * Reid: are we non conforming in C?
  * Shafik: no idea, I’ve not tested, but C has no destructors.
  * Tom/Ambrose: __attribute__((cleanup)) could see that
  * Joshua: conformance in C probably needs to return poison instead of unreachable
  * Reid: that sounds like something we need to fix
  * Aaron: Shafik, can you file an issue about the C bug?
  * Shafik: can someone share an example?
  * Hubert: I’m not seeing the unreachable in C in the IR.
  * Ambrose: in C++ we do emit a ud2, but we don’t in C. In C we don’t even have an unreachable, we just allocate the variable and load it uninitialized and return that
  * Aaron: that’s conforming then, the UB only comes when trying to use the value.
  * Hubert: we basically give you undef
  * Reid: which is what the standard says to do. So the defect it purely limited to C++, we don’t run cleanups when we should.
  * Ambrose: in C++ we also call llvm trap, which might be causing the ud2
  * Aaron: Shafik, the issue would be just C++ related to not running destructors
  * Hubert: you can wait until the core issue is blessed by core, but nobody is fighting against that, so I expect it will get in
  * Shafik: I’m wondering if there’s a way to observe the difference
  * Hubert: observability is if your destructor throws or calls exit()
  * Shafik: maybe that will subtly break something, but probably fine
  * Hubert: we’ll call the dtor in the case when we are supposed to call it, so I don’t think this will subtly break anything for anyone.
* CPATH
  * CPATH is currently documented incorrectly in Clang: https://clang.llvm.org/docs/CommandGuide/clang.html#environment it doesn’t match GCC’s behavior, and GCC’s docs are correct
  * https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/129113 is the PR to address this
  * Within Intel environments, CPATH has been used according to the documentation *a lot* in terms of system include paths but they’re actually user include paths.
  * We don’t have a user option to nominate a user include as a system include. Does anyone want to talk me out of this?
  * Erich: CSYSPATH
  * Tom: I’d follow up with GCC to do the same thing
  * Reid: is it C include path
  * Tom: I believe it’s only for C
  * Erich: I’d be shocked if it only was for C and not C++
  * Tom: nobody is jumping up and down to say don’t do it, so I’ll open an RFC
* Tue would like to do something for aliasing the math functions for long double or float128; is that allowed in C or does the standard require different functions to be totally different?
  * Hubert: what do you mean about aliasing?
  * Tue: when long double is double, I want sigl to point to sin
  * Hubert: won’t really have a problem with that as an implementation detail. Is this a question about taking the address of the function and see if they’re the same?
  * Tue: yes
  * Hubert: I think the standard says that they’re different functions
  * Aaron: I agree, I think it would be observable if you did the aliasing
  * Hubert: may be worth raising with the C committee
  * Reid: prior art may be Neibloids in the C++ standard. Don’t consider standard library APIs to be address stable.
  * Ambrose: yeah, wasn’t that for std::move and friends? Neibloids was you can’t find them via ADL?
  * Joshua: must be callable from their name without a header file
  * Tue: that’s fine with asm aliasing
  * Reid: yeah, need to come back to the standards body for a change to make the addresses not significant.
  * Tue: code folding and ifunc may point to the same one.

* Should we increase meeting length, drop round tables, have additional meetings? This is the third meeting in a row where we didn’t get through round tables, so it suggest we may need a change.

Round Table

* Didn’t get to them.
