Meeting Agenda - December 3rd, 2025

Agenda

* Procedural: Priority for the scribe
* Vlad: New reflection working group is starting up, first meeting happening this Friday ([post](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/dedicated-meeting-for-c-26-reflection/88927/5))
  * Aaron: for design discussions about reflections
  * Aaron: first meeting this friday, 12 PM ET
  * Aaron: only meet once during December, start regularly in January every two weeks
  * Vlad: any news from google folks?
  * Aaron: didn’t hear back from Richard and Chandler
  * Corentin: why would downstreams care?
  * Aaron: layering violation
  * Corentin: I’ll work on this in December
  * Corentin: we need to figure out whether we need a flag
  * Aaron: will be discussed in the reflection meeting
  * Aaron: we need to figure this out quickly, in time for Clang 22
  * Corentin: I’ll send my opinion, because I won’t be there on friday
  * James: what the layering violation is?
  * Aaron: this might not be an issue
  * Aaron: novel thing is generative metaprogramming, e.g. instantiating a template during constant evaluation. Consumers of AST but not Sema can have troubles. QoI to avoid IFNDR is also needed, but impact everyone
  * Corentin: Vlad do you mind if I steal your PR?
  * Vlad: you may need to revert to earlier revisions and then go from there. We can talk about this offline
* Clang 22 release branch is estimated to be cut off on Jan 13th ([release schedule docs](https://llvm.org/docs/HowToReleaseLLVM.html#annual-release-schedule))
  * Aaron: no need to rush for Clang 22, 23 is a perfect release to ship things that miss 22
  * Aaron: I know that Mariya is working on MSVC compat which has been re-landing multiple times. Closer to release too little time to revert things
  * Vlad: Are we aiming to ship C++26 expansion statements in Clang 22? ([stacked PR](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/169680))
    * There are outstanding Core issues ([3123](https://cplusplus.github.io/CWG/issues/3123.html), [3131](https://cplusplus.github.io/CWG/issues/3131.html)) that haven’t been seen even once
    * Aaron: Ambrose is working on this (and defer). Do we plan to ship this in 22
    * Ambrose: Corentin commented today that AST representation is not great at the moment. Needs refactoring for decls. Core issues are language design in Core, ongoing. Originally range needed to be constexpr, but not anymore. But this has implications for lifetime, which was also changed in a core issue.
    * Corentin: few things. One, wondering whether we can make declcontext work without a decl. Not fan of expansion statement not being a decl.
    * Ambrose: this would be a major refactoring. Declcontext would need to be a hierarchy.
    * Aaron: yes, we treat declcontext as decl in many places
    * Corentin: it’s also one of the reasons why lambda implementation is so bad. I think we should merge what is ready, because don’t want for the work to linger for 6 months
    * Ambrose: at least I don’t need to rebase them manually
    * Matheus: I’m working on patch that fixes lambda context, but using a different approach
    * Aaron: I don’t see why we’d treat it anything but usual, because it’s not even ratified.
    * Corentin: as long as we don’t set the feature test macro (FTM), we’re fine
    * Ambrose: 3131 is changing how size of range is calculated, just few weeks ago. Requires to create a lambda out of thin air
    * Ambrose: follow with a patch to support this in the new constexpr interpreter
    * Aaron: I’d like us not to expose std=c++29 to indicate that 29 is not stable when the time comes
    * Corentin: agreed
    * James: about FTM: can we set it something lower than the standard value
    * Aaron: in theory users should be checking the value, but they check the presence instead
    * Vlad: committee doesn’t like lower values
    * James: that’s the only answer they could give
    * Aaron: users won’t appreciate lower values. We didn’t set FTM for concepts, for example
    * Ambrose: if we manage to get this into 22, 23 is the earliest release to set the FTM. I expect bugs from new declcontext and instantiating parts of the template without instantiating the entire template.
    * Aaron: the feature is also not stabilized within the committee
    * Matheus: can we set FTM to a lower value
    * Aaron: that’s what James suggested
    * Vlad: authors of expansion statements have even less confidence in the wording than in reflection
    * Ambrose: 7 core issues are open, one of them is still have an issue
    * Corentin: this paper was sent to core in 2019
  * Aaron: are we aiming to ship defer in Clang 22? ([PR](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/162848))
    * Aaron: defer is in a similar state: not published yet. When Ambrose did the implementation, he worked off the latest draft of the TS, but ran into deployment issues because of keyword choice. JeanHeyd made the changed, but committee haven’t seen it yet. WG14 is not going to meet until february
    * Corentin: this is a TS. are we going to hide this behind the flag
    * Aaron: if WG14 changes anything, we can end up with two flags that behave differently
    * Corentin: I expect TS to change
    * Aaron: documentation is going to state that feature is subject to change. I’d like this to ship in 22, because users are excited.
    * Ambrose: there’s not much room for design changes, don’t expect substantial changes ahead. We have one weird codegen bug where where drop cleanups
    * Vlad: there was a discussion on WG14 reflector recently
    * Aaron: it was discussing behavior upon exiting the scope. One surprising example, but that’s how it works. No changes to behavior from there.
    * Aaron: would make sense to get defer in 22. 300+ interactions on a PR is unprecedented. GCC is working on this, too. Should help to solidify the design. Definitely behind a flag, definitely experimental
* Aaron: OverflowBehaviorTypes update ([post](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-v2-clang-introduce-overflowbehaviortypes-for-wrapping-and-non-wrapping-arithmetic/86507/49))
  * Aaron: extension to explicitly say whether an integer type wrap or trap. Driven by linux to have better safety and security. Want trap on unsigned overflow, -fwrapv is too coarse (TU-level). Discussed whether extension criteria were met, they were. Still open design questions. If these are separate types, then you should be able to overload on them. What about partial specializations then? Moving forward.
  * Corentin: not sure it’s a good feature specifically because of overloading, promotions, etc.
  * Ariel: backend support?
  * Aaron: Yes.
  * Ariel: How range checks are going to work?
  * Aaron: instrumentation.
  * Ariel: Are kernel people prepared to tolerate it?
  * Aaron: they are like us as not having single body to answer, but seems like they are.
  * Ariel: Performance impact measured?
  * Aaron: not sure
  * James: not always enabled. Not a new concept (rust). Unlike to deter anyone
  * Aaron: that was my impression, too. If wrap is bad, can pay the cost to prevent it
  * Ariel: timeframe?
  * Aaron: no timeframe, actively working. Behind a flag, experimental until deployment experience
  * Ariel: C standard?
  * Aaron: nothing is happening in WG14. one of the design criteria is to have a paper in front of a governing body. The plan is to get this in Clang to push folks in GCC and linux, then go to the committee
  * Ariel: so implemetaton-led. What about WG21?
  * Aaron: WG21 is unlikely to be interested in a new qualifier, because they’d like a library type. Probably will come via C, mapped to a library type.
  * Corentin: concern is promotion and overloading, also consistency. Don’t think we’re there
  * Aaron: what the concern with overloading?
  * Corentin: what happens if you have overloads with and without qualifier. New integral type is a very big hammer
  * Aaron: there are definitely design space questions
  * James: if this will be a library type in C++, that potentially constrains designs for C, right?
  * Matheus: this is overloading concern, but not sure if that’s a great idea. We have a precedent of making a qualifier a part of the type, but it’s not overloadable. Allowing overload later would not be a breaking change. Three are reasons why people don’t like overloading on those qualifiers, like multiple malloc
  * Aaron: yes, also a problem with va_args. We do have consensus that we want to solve the problem in the way that linux wants
  * Corentin: then we shouldn’t allow this in C++
  * Aaron: browsers also need this
  * Aaron: we make PR authors think about C++ because of compatibility concerns. Maybe the answer is to not expose it in C++
  * Corentin: even if we don’t allow it in C++, C still has [[overloaded]]
  * Aaron: mangling is still an issue in C because of that attribute, but we have vendor mangling
  * Matheus: we discussed a lot of technical things in LLVM dev meeting. Look at the notes
* Holiday availability; should we cancel the next meeting or will someone be around to chair it?
  * The first meeting next year is scheduled for Jan 7th
  * Aaron: I won’t be around to run it
  * Vlad: I’m not sure I’ll be there
  * Corentin: I’ll be there, but not sure if anything important happens
  * Aaron: I’m cancelling Dec 17th meeting
  * Vlad: next meeting Jan 7th
* Wave of LLM contributions ([policy](https://llvm.org/docs/DeveloperPolicy.html#ai-generated-contributions)) ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-llvm-ai-tool-policy-start-small-no-slop/88476))
  * Aaron: we’ve seen a wave of LLM-driven contributions in PRs and issues. Not sure if we need to reopen AI policy discussion. Started right after LLVM dev meeting
  * Corentin: shown the thread to multiple people. They were pleasantly surprised, but not sure if it was accepted
  * Ariel: what are these PRs doing? Cleaning up code?
  * Aaron: some for fixing bugs, some for cleanup, some are fixing hallucinated issues
  * Vlad: just wanted to follow up on earlier discussion, maybe the wave has subsided
  * Corentin: not just an LLVM issue
  * James: if you click on the [link](https://github.com/ocaml/ocaml/pull/14369/), it’s something that people want, but it can’t be accepted. It’s almost reasonable, but the author has no idea what they are doing
  * Reid: someone has to attest the quality before meting
  * Ariel: or explain how it works
  * Aaron: we’ve run into similar things. When reviewer get to it, author doesn’t know their patch
  * Aaron: action item for Reid to follow up on AI policy
  * Ariel: how do we know that it’s AI-generated
  * Aaron: overly verbose descriptions that don’t say anything
  * Aaron: also commits by claude
  * Aaron: not a major issues at the moment, but need to keep an eye on from the policy perspective. We are keep getting hit by this
  * Corentin: proposal for AI policy is very good, need to move forward
  * Ariel:
  * Aaron: human is in the loop, no bad inetntions, but they don’t have understanding. Eat up reviewer time, which is very precious
  * Corentin: no bad faith is the most unfortunate thing
  * Aaron: yes, it’s socially awkward to communicate that we don’t want to waste reviewers time
  * Ariel: what is extractive?
  * Aaron: take more from the community than you give

Meeting Agenda - November 19th, 2025

Agenda

* Vlad: WG21 meeting
  * Reflection
    * std::meta::is_structural_type
    * Annotations on function parameters
    * [CWG3065](https://cplusplus.github.io/CWG/issues/3065.html): disallow reflecting over extern block scope declarations
      * Disallowed because the extern declaration may have different information than the target declaration, so this is restricted until we can figure out how to resolve it (if ever)
      * This changes the definition of reachability (so it impact modules)
    * [CWG3122](https://github.com/cplusplus/CWG/issues/808): more reflect-expressions need to be value-dependent
    * [CWG3124](https://github.com/cplusplus/CWG/issues/809): disallow annotations on declarations that target a different scope than the scope they inhabit
      * Was primarily only useful for friend injection-like operations
    * [CWG3127](https://github.com/cplusplus/CWG/issues/810): synthesized points needs to be visible to a “subsequent” instantiation
      * Mostly just a wording bug
    * Upstreaming is starting in the community, so we should be aware of changes.
    * Most discussion was around national body comments.
    * Some new stuff was added (structural types, annotations on function parameters).
    * Reflecting over namespaces tends to be IFNDR all over the place, except for trivial examples. This is why more reflection expressions (within template definitions) will be value dependent, which should help with IFNDR around hypothetical instantiation. It’s a pretty significant change
    * Aaron: are we still comfortable with our plan to put reflection under a feature flag? Does anything here change our upstreaming plans?
    * Shafik: yes, it gets us the implementation experience and we can provide feedback to the committee, but it doesn’t tell users the feature is perfectly stable. We need to implement this.
    * Vlad: new points to corroborate with Shafik. Some of those core issues stem from experience with GCC implementation. Next GCC release should have P2996 implemented, at least according to the feature author in WG21. Our upstreaming is starting from reflect expression; two out of four core issues change reflect expression. We should make sure that there are no users depending on anything we implement and ship so we can make fixes without worrying about breaking users.
    * Corentin: really nothing new here with reflection; deducing this had a bunch of core issues from Clang and GCC, and we did not have a flag for that and no complaints from users about it. Some of our C++20 features don’t have manglings, etc. So long as we don’t set the feature test macro, I don’t think anyone is going to expect stability. Two concerns with a flag: we want people to use the feature and if GCC doesn’t have a flag and we do, it may be user hostile; I really want everything to be tested and passing with reflection, flags make that harder. Same for performance regressions. Want to find issues early.
    * Aaron: having a flag means we can set the feature test macro under the flag so that user code actually uses the functionality. No flag, we can’t set that and well-written code will not actually use reflection.
    * Corentin: still opposed, I want the feature test macro to be set only once the feature is fully complete.
    * Hubert: about stability; that’s not the real concern, we’ll fix DRs as they come in (aspirationally). When we fix DRs we don’t put those under flags. In the very early stages, we have no controversy that you need a cc1 option to turn this one (not a driver option) because it’s in no state to give to anyone to even play around with. It’s just for our tests. The real question is: when does the cc1 flag go away or become a driver flag? We need to talk about each of these different phases.
    * Corentin: I’m kind of fine with a cc1 flag, but I still want every test to be run under reflection and having a flag makes that difficult. We also have the new and old constexpr engine, so a flag means we need four RUN lines for each of those files.
    * Hubert: we need an understanding of where our tests are being run and what our CI configurations are. If we’re talking lit tests, the flags aren’t terribly painful because the new reflection code is unlikely to be exercised by all tests. If we’re disciplined in code review, we can make sure anything under the flag are things that strictly deal with reflection. In many case you don’t need the flag at all. We need to figure out how it works with libraries and what their testing variants are.
    * Aaron: personally, I’m fine with reflection being new constexpr engine only. It will take years for reflection to be done, so why do it twice?
    * Corentin: might take a community discussion, some folks want the old engine supported too
    * Matheus: we could use negative flags instead of positive flags; we don’t have to update everything, we could have opt out approach instead of opt in.
    * Hubert: these are for new tests that are being written. These don’t exist yet.
    * Matheus: Corentin was saying he’d like all existing tests to be run under reflection to catch interaction issues.
    * Hubert: that’s what I meant about code review; we need to understand whether a test actually is impacted or not.
    * Matheus: sure, but we don’t need to assume, we could test.
    * Hubert: that’s a different risk where lit tests test one thing and users see another. I’d be opposed to that. When we see reflection code, we should ensure it’s as common as possible (so the flag impact should be minimal outside of “is reflection a thing?”)
    * Aaron: what I am hearing is that we’re going to need a meeting (or more) dedicated to reflection.
    * Vlad: I am concerned that we are at the second half of November, December is likely to be very quiet, and then we’re hitting a feature freeze for the next release. We should have an answer as to whether we’re going to expose this by default in C++26 mode or not?
    * Aaron: I can’t imagine exposing this until enum->string works, as a baseline
    * Vlad: what do you mean about expose?
    * Aaron: use of ^^
    * Corentin: if we have a driver flag and we only use the driver flag is parsing (so that’s the only thing gated by the flag), that would make everyone happy for the next release and give us time.
    * Shafik: unwinding the stack a bit, I am not happy coupling the new constexpr interpreter to reflection; they should not be coupled; too much risk
    * Hubert: about -std=c++26 mode, we don’t to dismiss the idea entirely, at this point I think the lexing of the ^^ operator and the splicing operator are somethings we could enable in C++26 mode without turning on the meat of reflection, and it might be something we actually roll out.
    * Ariel: if we have a meeting for reflection, please report back to this committee for status updates
    * Corentin: a learning from GCC is that the compiler may have to own the meta::info object, not the library folks. Might be a header Clang has to vend itself.
  * Trivial relocation was removed
    * Had strong consensus to have the feature in 26, it was implemented in Clang
    * Then consensus swung to remove the feature
    * Unclear whether there will be further efforts for C++29
    * Unclear what we need to revert/keep in Clang, Corentin will think about it more prior to the release. Probably keep builtins but remove keywords.
    * Vlad: maybe an extension that could be enabled with a flag?
    * Corentin: I expect the feature to come back in a slightly different shape
  * constexpr uncaught_exceptions() and current_exception() did not receive core language fix that Hana proposed
    * constexpr exceptions in C++26, but then we figured out these APIs can’t really work. Hana came up with core wording, EWG didn’t approve it. So now it goes back to library and constexpr may be struck from these functions.
    * Shafik: I thought that was already stripped?
    * Vlad: not yet, probably where we’re headed. Core wording fix to make library work was not accepted, so library has to figure out how to fix it (which likely means stripping constexpr).
  * Anyone to speak for the LEWG or LWG?
    * Corentin: nothing major that affects the compiler happened there; std::format is going to be constexpr, but that shouldn’t impact us.
    * Vlad: I updated the previous meeting minutes to have information about LWG and LEWG now that we can speak about it
* Aaron: Expanding Clang Area Team size to 5 in 2026 ([thread](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/expanding-clang-area-team-size-to-5-in-2026/88896))
* Updates on bounds safety syntax ([post](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-bounds-safety-in-c-syntax-compatibility-with-gcc/85885/106))
  * GCC agreed to late parsing
  * But they want it to be limited to single identifier
  * Concerned about arbitrary expression
  * There are corner case like defining a type anywhere you can name it
  * GCC want Yeoul to come back with specification
  * Corentin: what is the use case for more than an identifier?
  * Aaron: this pointer minus that pointer
  * Corentin: GCC position is reasonable
  * Aaron: Yeoul recognize that they need to write a spec
  * Aaron: it allows us to enable kernel usages
  * Corentin: not sure if they care about C++, but it needs to be specified
  * Aaron: I still care about C++
  * Corentin: the way we do dependent expressions in attributes is ad-hoc, so we need specification
  * Aaron: on C++ side the plan is late parse everything
  * Vlad: dependent expressions are sneaked into C. how chains of dependencies are going to work?
  * Aaron: yeah, that’s why I’m not writing wording for it
* Raising toolchain requirements to move towards C++20 ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-raise-the-minimum-compiler-requirements-to-move-toward-c-20/88894))
* strong typedefs ([thread](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-clang-adding-strong-typedefs/88843))
  * Underdeveloped at the moment

Meeting Agenda - November 5th, 2025

Agenda

* Aaron: LLVM Developer Meeting
  * Dev meeting last week
  * Quite successful
  * A lot of people happy to hear about clang, because traditionally it has been llvm-focused
  * 530 attendees, which is 13% increase over last time, but 20% less than pre-covid
  * Over half of them are newcomers to the community
  * Many are focused on MLIR, maybe working for AI companies
  * Panel on contributing on clang
    * Successful, but not as well attended as Aaron hoped
    * Pushed on defect report, including testing
    * Couple of folks interested in DRs
    * Request: as you see PRs from first-time contributors, add reviewers, because they can’t do that themselves
    * 90% of first-time contributors don’t get their patches reviewed
    * Ariel: is there any value having tests for these? And keeping the list of known failures
    * Aaron: we have a page for DR status. We’re asking to look at core issues and write a test
    * Ariel: are they run?
    * Aaron: yes, as regular tests
    * Aaron: committees assume that all DRs are implemented
    * Aaron: type traits DRs are a good example of what’s not implemented
    * Vlad: this is also important for conformance questions
    * Aaron: everyone’s conformance is aspirational
    * Aaron: there’s a formally verified C implementation
    * Vlad: what are they checking object model against
  * Future llvm dev meetings:
    * Adding a maintainers day, invitation-only
    * Let parts of the projects talk to each other in a single room
    * Nothing is finalized yet
    * Maybe even a separate event
    * Remote participation is considered
  * State of clang talk
    * Surprisingly well attended, 150-200 people
    * Positive comments
    * Deer in a headlight moment when someone asked if committees activity is sustainable
    * Ariel asked for clarification
    * Aaron: every implementation is behind
    * Aaron: linear algebra library is added. Everyone says “ship boost”
    * Aaron: if the committees keep the pace, will we ever catch up?
    * Aaron: not enough resources to realize everyone’s dreams in production implementations
    * Aaron: I told the person that I share their concerns, and asked them to join the committees
* Vlad: secret agenda item🤫🤐🔐
  * Intentionally not taking notes. :-D (added on 2025-11-19)
  * Core
    * Matheus’ [P3579R2](https://wg21.link/p3579) about template template parameter matching failed in Core
    * The group has been consumed by the order of destruction of objects with static storage duration ([CWG3100](https://cplusplus.github.io/CWG/issues/3100.html))
  * Evolution is running on time
  * Contracts
    * [Consensus](https://github.com/cplusplus/nbballot/issues/981#issuecomment-3488971795) to maintain contracts in C++26 DIS, no consensus to do anything else
    * Constification: no consensus for change
      * Parameters referenced in postconditions will also keep constifying
    * Virtual functions and function pointers: no consensus for change
    * Contracts in hardened library: strong consensus to adopt [P3878R0](https://isocpp.org/files/papers/P3878R0.html)
    * Adding a check whether implementation-defined contract violation handler is replaceable: consensus to adopt [P3886R0](https://wiki.edg.com/pub/Wg21kona2025/EvolutionWorkingGroup/P3886R0%20-%20Wording%20for%20AT1-057.pdf)
    * Non-ignorable contracts: [consensus](https://github.com/cplusplus/nbballot/issues/631#issuecomment-3488277609) to adopt one of the options from [D3911R0](https://isocpp.org/files/papers/D3911R0.html)
      * Telecons to pick the exact option will be coming
  * [Paper](https://isocpp.org/files/papers/P3847R0.html) about mandating lexical order of data members for explicit captures [was adopted](https://github.com/cplusplus/papers/issues/2534#issuecomment-3483195599)
    * This is status quo in every implementation
  * [Paper](https://wg21.link/P2414R10) about pointer zap [was finally adopted](https://github.com/cplusplus/papers/issues/1084#issuecomment-3483324532) as a DR
    * Piggybacks on Davis’ [P2434R4](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2025/p2434r4.html)
  * Corentin’s and Younan’s [paper](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2025/p3606r1.html) about TAD during overload resolution [was adopted](https://github.com/cplusplus/papers/issues/2255#issuecomment-3483469175)
  * [Paper](https://wg21.link/P3776R1) about trailing commas has [failed](https://github.com/cplusplus/papers/issues/2421#issuecomment-3483600779)
  * [Paper](https://wg21.link/P3765R0) about deprecation of implicit conversions from bool to char types was [a resounding failure](https://github.com/cplusplus/papers/issues/2384#issuecomment-3483420460)
  * [Paper](https://wg21.link/p3423r1) about allowing constant expression in unevaluated strings that are used for diagnostics was [adopted](https://github.com/cplusplus/papers/issues/2092#issuecomment-3487730471)
  * Library is running over time
  * [Paper](https://wiki.edg.com/bin/edit/Wg21kona2025/P3391R1?topicparent=Wg21kona2025.LibraryEvolutionWorkingGroup) about constepxr std::format was adopted for C++26
  * [Paper](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2025/p1789r1.pdf) about integer_sequence support for expansion statements was adopted for C++26
  * Consensus to keep std::hive in the DIS and to make it constexpr
  * Consensus against removing linear algebra
* Vlad: Google [has published](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/announcement-llvm-dashboard-to-monitor-code-review-and-contribution-rates-over-time/88680) dashboard with various contribution metrics
* Aaron: what to do with the defer PR

Meeting Agenda - October 15th, 2025

Agenda

* Aaron: Documenting C-style type punning via unions in C++ mode ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/ub-when-type-punning-through-unions/88527))
  * John McCall has [suggested](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/ub-when-type-punning-through-unions/88527/5) wording to describe the extension
  * Corentin: might want to talk about this RFC with Oliver, because this impacts pointer authentication. Probably fine for things which are implicit lifetime (or something like that), but can’t type pun arbitrary types.
  * Aaron: goal is to cover what’s idiomatic in C, so oddities in C++ like vtables, etc are off the table
  * Corentin: I wonder how this plays out with the type sanitizer
  * Aaron: I have not tried the type sanitizer out, I should do that.
* Vlad: Updates on [RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-require-pull-requests-for-all-llvm-project-commits/88164) about requiring PRs for every commit
  * Project council meeting on the topic, almost entirely dedicated to this topic
  * Initial proposal to enable the restriction has not yet reached consensus
  * Will improve the process for release managers to merge PR; they will tick the checkbox to require PRs and then add everyone to the exception list (so people are still not required to be reviewed)
  * Direct pushes succeed but get a warning about how they should use PRs. They’re asking for a timeline to remove the exceptions so that pull requests with acceptance are required. Perhaps by the end of the year.
  * Are collecting data about how many pushes/contributors are direct pushes, but this data is not yet published. The line is trending downward though; less direct pushes.
  * Aaron: reviews required?
  * Vlad: not initially, but expecting to head that direction in the future
  * Aaron: not a bad idea, but that requires all the downstreams to buy in and provide that review bandwidth, otherwise we functionally can’t for practical reasons.
  * Vlad: this intent isn’t publicly stated, so the idea may evolve
  * Shafik: I hope that intent is made explicit as part of the RFC so we can think about how that works functionally. We need better statistics to help decide whether this is sensible.
  * Reid: I’m trying to get response time, merge time, organizational breakdown, etc as part of a dashboard that can be viewed by the community; it helps with making these decisions.
  * Aaron: if there’s a way I can help anyone make a case to their mgmt for adding resources to the community, I’m happy to help – just reach out to me.
  * Reid: let’s follow up on this
  * Aaron: SG!
* Reid (if present): Updates on AI policy [RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-llvm-ai-tool-policy-start-small-no-slop/88476)
  * Persuaded by Nikita’s rationale on tool output as of 2025 being insufficient and we don’t want to review its output unless it’s been modified for correctness and conciseness.
  * There’s a round table on AI policy at the dev conf
* Vlad: AArch64 pre-commit CI [is being tested](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-aarch64-pre-commit-ci/88169/24)
  * It’s enabled in a testing mode where it always reports success; in the future this might cause test failures due to target differences (catching them in pre-commit instead of post-commit)
  * May take a few months before we get to that point
* LLVM Dev conference happening the week of Oct 27th
  * Will have a panel discussion on contributing to Clang
  * Reid will moderate, yay!
* WG21 meeting happening in Kona in two weeks
  * Processing National Body comments; if you have concerns about any of them, let Corentin know

Round Table

Meeting Agenda - October 1st, 2025

Agenda

* Reflection upstreaming (Vlad)
  * Nhat from Bloomberg reached out to Shafik, more people are involved
  * He asked for a minimum viable PR to start with
  * Just initial discussions for now
  * Vlad: Dan is indeed responsive
* On the forums (Vlad):
  * GitHub spam:
    * Tom Stellard [enabled](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/how-to-respond-to-spam-in-issues-and-pull-requests/86312/8) interaction limits for newly created accounts for 3 days, ending today or tomorrow
    * In the future we might see an RFC to enable this mode permanently
  * Unix line endings for LLVM monorepo ([thread](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/llvm-source-file-line-endings/81388))
    * Seems to be moving into the coding standard ([PR](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/161228))
    * The defacto standard looks like it has been unix line ending for source files (not tests)
  * GitHub PR auto-merge feature gained consensus and has been enabled since August 12th ([post](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-enable-github-auto-merge-feature/87547/21))
    * “Merge this PR when CI passes” feature, without much else to it
  * [RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-c-modules-stop-using-abbrev-and-drop-the-maintainance/87063) about dropping abbrev from AST serialization
    * Abbreviations are a disk space optimization that doesn’t seem to be very beneficial (reportedly 3%), but comes with a significant maintenance burden
    * It doesn’t seem to have any opposition, but consensus hasn’t been called yet
    * Some downstream concerns, waiting to hear back on these
  * -fstrict-bool discussion ([thread](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/defining-what-happens-when-a-bool-isn-t-0-or-1/86778))
    * GCC is going to change their default behavior of -O0 ([post](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/defining-what-happens-when-a-bool-isn-t-0-or-1/86778/39))
    * Waiting for Area team to ok the change
  * OverflowBehaviorTypes seem to undergo significant changes after recent developments ([RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-v2-clang-introduce-overflowbehaviortypes-for-wrapping-and-non-wrapping-arithmetic/86507), [PR comment](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/148914#issuecomment-3353264096))
    * This is a quite old (May 2025) RFC that suggests type qualifiers (?) to encode overflow and underflow behavior for integer types, driven by Linux needs
    * RFC was accepted, and upstream implementation started in mid-July ([PR](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/148914)). It’s been under active review since then.
    * Recently John McCall joined the discussion, pointing out deficiencies in semantics of the new feature. As a result, authors proposed two modes: default and strict, also defining how they interact.
  * [RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-ripple-a-compiler-interpreted-api-to-support-spmd-and-loop-annotation-programming-for-simd-targets/88241): Ripple: A compiler-interpreted API to support SPMD and loop annotation programming for SIMD targets
    * On the Clang side we should expect a bunch of new builtins. Hopefully they can be contained in a SemaRipple or something.
  * Discussion about strengthening AI policy ([thread](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/our-ai-policy-vs-code-of-conduct-and-vs-reality/88300))
    * It seems that everyone agrees that we need to change something, but the debate seems still open.
  * [RFC](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-call-graph-information-from-clang-llvm-for-c-c/88255) for embedding call graph information
    * Consists of new LLVM metadata, new ELF section, and new llvm-readelf option to export the information to JSON
    * Ariel: why do they want it in a .o file? Maybe worth asking on the thread?
* Public project council meeting on Oct 1st ([thread](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/llvm-project-council-meeting-october-1-2025/88436))

Round Table

* Ariel: A lot of little things, mostly downstream
* Shafik: Working on static issues internally, A lot of code review. CWG meeting last Friday
  * CWG issue about template template parameters and CTAD
  * Corentin fixed the crash: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/161488
* Matheus: Improved diagnostic handling for template parameters but was reverted because of small performance regression, working on reworking it.
* Tue: updating adding MSVC for libc on the Mac
* Vlad: CWG meeting and time off
